391 U.S. 145

88 S.Ct. 1444

20 L.Ed.2d 491

Gary DUNCAN, Appellant,  
v.  
STATE OF LOUISIANA.

No. 410.

Argued Jan. 17, 1968.

Decided May 20, 1968.

Rehearing Denied June 17, 1968.

See 392 U.S. 947, 88 S.Ct. 2270.

Richard B. Sobol, New Orleans, La., for appellant.

Mrs. Dorothy D. Wolbrette, New Orleans, La., for appellee.

Mr. Justice WHITE delivered the opinion of the Court.

1

Appellant, Gary Duncan, was convicted of simple battery in the Twenty-fifth
Judicial District Court of Louisiana. Under Louisiana law simple battery is a
misdemeanor, punishable by a maximum of two years' imprisonment and a $300
fine. Appellant sought trial by jury, but because the Louisiana Constitution
grants jury trials only in cases in which capital punishment or imprisonment
at hard labor may be imposed,1 the trial judge denied the request. Appellant
was convicted and sentenced to serve 60 days in the parish prison and pay a
fine of $150. Appellant sought review in the Supreme Court of Louisiana,
asserting that the denial of jury trial violated rights guaranteed to him by
the United States Constitution. The Supreme Court, finding '(n)o error of law
in the ruling complained of,' denied appellant a writ of certiorari.2 Pursuant
to 28 U.S.C. s 1257(2) appellant sought review in this Court, alleging that
the Sixth and Fourteenth Amendments to the United States Constitution secure
the right to jury trial in state criminal prosecutions where a sentence as
long as two years may be imposed. We noted probable jurisdiction,3 and set the
case for oral argument with No. 52, Bloom v. State of Illinois, 391 U.S. 194,
88 S.Ct. 1477, 20 L.Ed.2d ---.

2

Appellant was 19 years of age when tried. While driving on Highway 23 in
Plaquemines Parish on October 18, 1966, he saw two younger cousins engaged in
a conversation by the side of the road with four white boys. Knowing his
cousins, Negroes who had recently transferred to a formerly all-white high
school, had reported the occurrence of racial incidents at the school, Duncan
stopped the car, got out, and approached the six boys. At trial the white boys
and a white onlooker testified, as did appellant and his cousins. The
testimony was in dispute on many points, but the witnesses agreed that
appellant and the white boys spoke to each other, that appellant encouraged
his cousins to break off the encounter and enter his car, and that appellant
was about to enter the car himself for the purpose of driving away with his
cousins. The whites testified that just before getting in the car appellant
slapped Herman Landry, one of the white boys, on the elbow. The Negroes
testified that appellant had not slapped Landry, but had merely touched him.
The trial judge concluded that the State had proved beyond a reasonable doubt
that Duncan had committed simple battery, and found him guilty.

I.

3

The Fourteenth Amendment denies the States the power to 'deprive any person of
life, liberty, or property, without due process of law.' In resolving
conclicting claims concerning the meaning of this spacious language, the Court
has looked increasingly to the Bill of Rights for guidance; many of the rights
guaranteed by the first eight Amendments to the Constitution have been held to
be protected against state action by the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth
Amendment. That clause now protects the right to compensation for property
taken by the State;4 the rights of speech, press, and religion covered by the
First Amendment;5 the Fourth Amendment rights to be free from unreasonable
searches and seizures and to have excluded from criminal trials any evidence
illegally seized;6 the right guaranteed by the Fifth Amendment to be free of
compelled self-incrimination;7 and the Sixth Amendment rights to counsel,8 to
a speedy9 and public10 trial, to confrontation of opposing witnesses,11 and to
compulsory process for obtaining witnesses.12

4

The test for determining whether a right extended by the Fifth and Sixth
Amendments with respect to federal criminal proceedings is also protected
against state action by the Fourteenth Amendment has been phrased in a variety
of ways in the opinions of this Court. The question has been asked whether a
right is among those "fundamental principles of liberty and justice which lie
at the base of all our civil and political institutions," Powell v. State of
Alabama, 287 U.S. 45, 67, 53 S.Ct. 55, 63, 77 L.Ed. 158 (1932);13 whether it
is 'basic in our system of jurisprudence,' In re Oliver, 333 U.S. 257, 273, 68
S.Ct. 499, 507, 92 L.Ed. 682 (1948); and whether it is 'a fundamental right,
essential to a fair trial,' Gideon v. Wainwright, 372 U.S. 335, 343--344, 83
S.Ct. 792, 796, 9 L.Ed.2d 799 (1963); Malloy v. Hogan, 378 U.S. 1, 6, 84 S.Ct.
1489, 1492, 12 L.Ed.2d 653 (1964); Pointer v. State of Texas, 380 U.S. 400,
403, 85 S.Ct. 1065, 1067, 13 L.Ed.2d 923 (1965). The claim before us is that
the right to trial by jury guaranteed by the Sixth Amendment meets these
tests. The position of Louisiana, on the other hand, is that the Constitution
imposes upon the States no duty to give a jury trial in any criminal case,
regardless of the seriousness of the crime or the size of the punishment which
may be imposed. Because we believe that trial by jury in criminal cases is
fundamental to the American scheme of justice, we hold that the Fourteenth
Amendment guarantees a right of jury trial in all criminal cases which--were
they to be tried in a federal court would come within the Sixth Amendment's
guarantee.14 Since we consider the appeal before us to be such a case, we hold
that the Constitution was violated when appellant's demand for jury trial was
refused.

5

The history of trial by jury in criminal cases has been frequently told.15 It
is sufficient for present purposes to say that by the time our Constitution
was written, jury trial in criminal cases had been in existence in England for
several centuries and carried impressive credentials traced by many to Magna
Carta.16 Its preservation and proper operation as a protection against
arbitrary rule were among the major objectives of the revolutionary settlement
which was expressed in the Declaration and Bill of Rights of 1689. In the 18th
century Blackstone could write:

6

'Our law has therefore wisely placed this strong and two-fold barrier, of a
presentment and a trial by jury, between the liberties of the people and the
prerogative of the crown. It was necessary, for preserving the admirable
balance of our constitution, to vest the executive power of the laws in the
prince: and yet this power might be dangerous and destructive to that very
constitution, if exerted without check or control, by justices of oyer and
terminer occasionally named by the crown; who might then, as in France or
Turkey, imprison, dispatch, or exile any man that was obnoxious to the
government, by an instant declaration that such is their will and pleasure.
But the founders of the English law have, with excellent forecast, contrived
that * * * the truth of every accusation, whether preferred in the shape of
indictment, information, or appeal, should afterwards be confirmed by the
unanimous suffrage of twelve of his equals and neighbours, indifferently
chosen and superior to all suspicion.'17

7

Jury trial came to America with English colonists, and received strong support
from them. Royal interference with the jury trial was deeply resented. Among
the resolutions adopted by the First Congress of the American Colonies (the
Stamp Act Congress) on October 19, 1765--resolutions deemed by their authors
to state 'the most essential rights and liberties of the colonists'18--was the
declaration:

8

'That trial by jury is the inherent and invaluable right of every British
subject in these colonies.'

9

The First Continental Congress, in the resolve of October 14, 1774, objected
to trials before judges dependent upon the Crown alone for their salaries and
to trials in England for alleged crimes committed in the colonies; the
Congress therefore declared:

10

'That the respective colonies are entitled to the common law of England, and
more especially to the great and inestimable privilege of being tried by their
peers of the vicinage, according to the course of that law.'19

11

The Declaration of Independence stated solemn objections to the King's making
'judges dependent on his will alone, for the tenure of their offices, and the
amount and payment of their salaries,' to his 'depriving us in many cases, of
the benefits of Trial by Jury,' and to his 'transporting us beyond Seas to be
tried for pretended offenses.' The Constitution itself, in Art. III, ยง 2,
commanded:

12

'The Trial of all Crimes, except in Cases of Impeachment, shall be by Jury;
and such Trial shall be held in the State where the said Crimes shall have
been committed.'

13

Objections to the Constitution because of the absence of a bill of rights were
met by the immediate submission and adoption of the Bill of Rights. Included
was the Sixth Amendment which, among other things, provided:

14

'In all criminal prosecutions, the accused shall enjoy the right to a speedy
and public trial, by an impartial jury of the State and district wherein the
crime shall have been committed.'20

15

The constitutions adopted by the original States guaranteed jury trial. Also,
the constitution of every State entering the Union thereafter in one form or
another protected the right to jury trial in criminal cases.

16

Even such skeletal history is impressive support for considering the right to
jury trial in criminal cases to be fundamental to our system of justice, an
importance frequently recognized in the opinions of this Court. For example,
the Court has said:

17

'Those who emigrated to this country from England brought with them this great
privilege 'as their birthright and inheritance, as a part of that admirable
common law which had fenced around and interposed barriers on every side
against the approaches of arbitrary power."21

18

Jury trial continues to receive strong support. The laws of every State
guarantee a right to jury trial in serious criminal cases; no State has
dispensed with it; nor are there significant movements underway to do so.
Indeed, the three most recent state constitutional revisions, in Maryland,
Michigan, and New York, carefully preserved the right of the accused to have
the judgment of a jury when tried for a serious crime.22

19

We are aware of prior cases in this Court in which the prevailing opinion
contains statements contrary to our holding today that the right to jury trial
in serious criminal cases is a fundamental right and hence must be recognized
by the States as part of their obligation to extend due process of law to all
persons within their jurisdiction. Louisiana relies especially on Maxwell v.
Dow, 176 U.S. 581, 20 S.Ct. 448, 44 L.Ed. 597 (1900); Palko v. State of
Connecticut, 302 U.S. 319, 58 S.Ct. 149, 82 L.Ed. 288 (1937); and Snyder v.
Commonwealth of Massachusetts, 291 U.S. 97, 54 S.Ct. 330, 78 L.Ed. 674 (1934).
None of these cases, however, dealt with a State which had purported to
dispense entirely with a jury trial in serious criminal cases. Maxwell held
that no provision of the Bill of Rights applied to the States--a position long
since repudiated--and that the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment
did not prevent a State from trying a defendant for a noncapital offense with
fewer than 12 men on the jury. It did not deal with a case in which no jury at
all had been provided. In neither Palko nor Snyder was jury trial actually at
issue, although both cases contain important dicta asserting that the right to
jury trial is not essential to ordered liberty and may be dispensed with by
the States regardless of the Sixth and Fourteenth Amendments. These
observations, though weighty and respectable, are nevertheless dicta,
unsupported by holdings in this Court that a State may refuse a defendant's
demand for a jury trial when he is charged with a serious crime. Perhaps
because the right to jury trial was not directly at stake, the Court's remarks
about the jury in Palko and Snyder took no note of past or current
developments regarding jury trials, did not consider its purposes and
functions, attempted no inquiry into how well it was performing its job, and
did not discuss possible distinctions between civil and criminal cases. In
Malloy v. Hogan, supra, the Court rejected Palko's discussion of the self-
incrimination clause. Respectfully, we reject the prior dicta regarding jury
trial in criminal cases.

20

The guarantees of jury trial in the Federal and State Constitutions reflect a
profound judgment about the way in which law should be enforced and justice
administered. A right to jury trial is granted to criminal defendants in order
to prevent oppression by the Government.23 Those who wrote our constitutions
knew from history and experience that it was necessary to protect against
unfounded criminal charges brought to eliminate enemies and against judges too
responsive to the voice of higher authority. The framers of the constitutions
strove to create an independent judiciary but insisted upon further protection
against arbitrary action. Providing an accused with the right to be tried by a
jury of his peers gave him an inestimable safeguard against the corrupt or
overzealous prosecutor and against the compliant, biased, or eccentric judge.
If the defendant preferred the common-sense judgment of a jury to the more
tutored but perhaps less sympathetic reaction of the single judge, he was to
have it. Beyond this, the jury trial provisions in the Federal and State
Constitutions reflect a fundamental decision about the exercise of official
power--a reluctance to entrust plenary powers over the life and liberty of the
citizen to one judge or to a group of judges. Fear of unchecked power, so
typical of our State and Federal Governments in other respects, found
expression in the criminal law in this insistence upon community participation
in the determination of guilt or innocence. The deep commitment of the Nation
to the right of jury trial in serious criminal cases as a defense against
arbitrary law enforcement qualifies for protection under the Due Process
Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment, and must therefore be respected by the
States.

21

Of course jury trial has 'its weaknesses and the potential for misuse,' Singer
v. United States, 380 U.S. 24, 35, 85 S.Ct. 783, 790, 13 L.Ed.2d 630 (1965).
We are aware of the long debate, especially in this century, among those who
write about the administration of justice, as to the wisdom of permitting
untrained laymen to determine the facts in civil and criminal proceedings.24
Although the debate has been intense, with powerful voices on either side,
most of the controversy has centered on the jury in civil cases. Indeed, some
of the severest critics of civil juries acknowledge that the arguments for
criminal juries are much stronger.25 In addition, at the heart of the dispute
have been express or implicit assertions that juries are incapable of
adequately understanding evidence or determining issues of fact, and that they
are unpredictable, quixotic, and little better than a roll of dice. Yet, the
most recent and exhaustice study of the jury in criminal cases concluded that
juries do understand the evidence and come to sound conclusions in most of the
cases presented to them and that when juries differ with the result at which
the judge would have arrived, it is usually because they are serving some of
the very purposes for which they were created and for which they are now
employed.26

22

The State of Louisiana urges that holding that the Fourteenth Amendment
assures a right to jury trial will cast doubt on the integrity of every trial
conducted without a jury. Plainly, this is not the import of our holding. Our
conclusion is that in the American States, as in the federal judicial system,
a general grant of jury trial for serious offenses is a fundamental right,
essential for preventing miscarriages of justice and for assuring that fair
trials are provided for all defendants. We would not assert, however, that
every criminal trial--or any particular trial--held before a judge alone is
unfair or that a defendant may never be as fairly treated by a judge as he
would be by a jury. Thus we hold no constitutional doubts about the practices,
common in both federal and state courts, of accepting waivers of jury trial27
and prosecuting petty crimes without extending a right to jury trial.28
However, the fact is that in most places more trials for serious crimes are to
juries than to a court alone; a great many defendants prefer the judgment of a
jury to that of a court.29 Even where defendants are satisfied with bench
trials, the right to a jury trial very likely serves its intended purpose of
making judicial or prosecutorial unfairness less likely.30

II.

23

Louisiana's final contention is that even if it must grant jury trials in
serious criminal cases, the conviction before us is valid and constitutional
because here the petitioner was tried for simple battery and was sentenced to
only 60 days in the parish prison. We are not persuaded. It is doubtless true
that there is a category of petty crimes or offenses which is not subject to
the Sixth Amendment jury trial provision31 and should not be subject to the
Fourteenth Amendment jury trial requirement here applied to the States. Crimes
carrying possible penalties up to six months do not require a jury trial if
they otherwise qualify as petty offenses, Cheff v. Schnackenberg, 384 U.S.
373, 86 S.Ct. 1523, 16 L.Ed.2d 629 (1966). But the penalty authorized for a
particular crime is of major relevance in determining whether it is serious or
not and may in itself, if severe enough, subject the trial to the mandates of
the Sixth Amendment. District of Columbia v. Clawans, 300 U.S. 617, 57 S.Ct.
660, 81 L.Ed. 843 (1937). The penalty authorized by the law of the locality
may be taken 'as a gauge of its social and ethical judgments.' 300 U.S., at
628, 57 S.Ct., at 663, of the crime in question. In Clawans the defendant was
jailed for 60 days, but it was the 90-day authorized punishment on which the
Court focused in determining that the offense was not one for which the
Constitution assured trial by jury. In the case before us the Legislature of
Louisiana has made simple battery a criminal offense punishable by
imprisonment for up to two years and a fine. The question, then, is whether a
crime carrying such a penalty is an offense which Louisiana may insist on
trying without a jury.

24

We think not. So-called petty offenses were tried without juries both in
England and in the Colonies and have always been held to be exempt from the
otherwise comprehensive language of the Sixth Amendment's jury trial
provisions. There is no substantial evidence that the Framers intended to
depart from this established common-law practice, and the possible
consequences to defendants from convictions for petty offenses have been
thought insufficient to outweigh the benefits to efficient law enforcement and
simplified judicial administration resulting from the availability of speedy
and inexpensive nonjury adjudications. These same considerations compel the
same result under the Fourteenth Amendment. Of course the boundaries of the
petty offense category have always been ill-defined, if not ambulatory. In the
absence of an explicit constitutional provision, the definitional task
necessarily falls on the courts, which must either pass upon the validity of
legislative attempts to identify those petty offenses which are exempt from
jury trial or, where the legislature has not addressed itself to the problem,
themselves face the question in the first instance. In either case it is
necessary to draw a line in the spectrum of crime, separating petty from
serious infractions. This process, although essential, cannot be wholly
satisfactory, for it requires attaching different consequences to events
which, when they lie near the line, actually differ very little.

25

In determining whether the length of the authorized prison term or the
seriousness of other punishment is enough in itself to require a jury trial,
we are counseled by District of Columbia v. Clawans, supra, to refer to
objective criteria, chiefly the existing laws and practices in the Nation. In
the federal system, petty offenses are defined as those punishable by no more
than six months in prison and a $500 fine.32 In 49 of the 50 States crimes
subject to trial without a jury, which occasionally include simple battery,
are punishable by no more than one year in jail.33 Moreover, in the late 18th
century in America crimes triable without a jury were for the most part
punishable by no more than a six-month prison term, although there appear to
have been exceptions to this rule.34 We need not, however, settle in this case
the exact location of the line between petty offenses and serious crimes. It
is sufficient for our purposes to hold that a crime punishable by two years in
prison is, based on past and contemporary standards in this country, a serious
crime and not a petty offense.35 Consequently, appellant was entitled to a
jury trial and it was error to deny it.

26

The judgment below is reversed and the case is remanded for proceedings not
inconsistent with this opinion.

27

Reversed and remanded.

28

Mr. Justice BLACK, with whom Mr. Justice DOUGLAS joins, concurring.

29

The Court today holds that the right to trial by jury guaranteed defendants in
criminal cases in federal courts by Art. III of the United States Constitution
and by the Sixth Amendment is also guaranteed by the Fourteenth Amendment to
defendants tried in state courts. With this holding I agree for reasons given
by the Court. I also agree because of reasons given in my dissent in Adamson
v. People of State of California, 332 U.S. 47, 68, 67 S.Ct. 1672, 1683, 91
L.Ed. 1903. In that dissent, at 90, 67 S.Ct., at 1695, I took the position,
contrary to the holding in Twining v. State of New Jersey, 211 U.S. 78, 29
S.Ct. 14, 53 L.Ed. 97, that the Fourteenth Amendment made all of the
provisions of the Bill of Rights applicable to the States. This Court in Palko
v. State of Connecticut, 302 U.S. 319, 323, 58 S.Ct. 149, 151, 82 L.Ed. 288,
decided in 1937, although saying '(t)here is no such general rule,' went on to
add that the Fourteenth Amendment may make it unlawful for a State to abridge
by its statutes the

30

'freedom of speech which the First Amendment safeguards against encroachment
by the Congress * * * or the like freedom of the press * * * or the free
exercise of religion * * * or the right of peaceable assembly * * * or the
right of one accused of crime to the benefit of counsel * * *. In these and
other situations immunities that are valid as against the federal government
by force of the specific pledges of particular amendments have been found to
be implicit in the concept of ordered liberty, and thus, through the
Fourteenth Amendment, become valid as against the states.' Id., at 324--325,
58 S.Ct., at 151--152.

31

And the Palko opinion went on to explain, 302 U.S., at 326, 58 S.Ct., at 152,
that certain Bill of Rights' provisions were made applicable to the States by
bringing them 'within the Fourteenth Amendment by a process of absorption.'
Thus Twining v. State of New Jersey, supra, refused to hold that any one of
the Bill of Rights' provisions was made applicable to the States by the
Fourteenth Amendment, but Palko, which must be read as overruling Twining on
this point, concluded that the Bill of Rights Amendments that are 'implicit in
the concept of ordered liberty' are 'absorbed' by the Fourteenth as
protections against state invasion. In this situation I said in Adamson v.
People of State of California, 332 U.S., at 89, 67 S.Ct., at 1695 that, while
'I would * * * extend to all the people of the nation the complete protection
of the Bill of Rights,' that '(i)f the choice must be between the selective
process of the Palko decision applying some of the Bill of Rights to the
States, or the Twining rule applying none of them, I would choose the Palko
selective process.' See Gideon v. Wainwright, 372 U.S. 335, 83 S.Ct. 792, 9
L.Ed.2d 799. And I am very happy to support this selective process through
which our Court has since the Adamson case held most of the specific Bill of
Rights' protections applicable to the States to the same extent they are
applicable to the Federal Government. Among these are the right to trial by
jury decided today, the right against compelled self-incrimination, the right
to counsel, the right to compulsory process for witnesses, the right to
confront witnesses, the right to a speedy and public trial, and the right to
be free from unreasonable searches and seizures.

32

All of these holdings making Bill of Rights' provisions applicable as such to
the States mark, of course, a departure from the Twining doctrine holding that
none of those provisions were enforceable as such against the States. The
dissent in this case, however, makes a spirited and forceful defense of that
now discredited doctrine. I do not believe that it is necessary for me to
repeat the historical and logical reasons for my challenge to the Twining
holding contained in my Adamson dissent and Appendix to it. What I wrote there
in 1947 was the product of years of study and research. My appraisal of the
legislative history followed 10 years of legislative experience as a Senator
of the United States, not a bad way, I suspect, to learn the value of what is
said in legislative debates, committee discussions, committee reports, and
various other steps taken in the course of passage of bills, resolutions, and
proposed constitutional amendments. My Brother HARLAN'S objections to my
Adamson dissent history, like that of most of the objectors, relies most
heavily on a criticism written by Professor Charles Fairman and published in
the Stanford Law Review. 2 Stan.L.Rev. 5 (1949). I have read and studied this
article extensively, including the historical references, but am compelled to
add that in my view it has completely failed to refute the inferences and
arguments that I suggested in my Adamson dissent. Professor Fairman's
'history' relies very heavily on what was not said in the state legislatures
that passed on the Fourteenth Amendment. Instead of relying on this kind of
negative pregnant, my legislative experience has convinced me that it is far
wiser to rely on what was said, and most importantly, said by the men who
actually sponsored the Amendment in the Congress. I know from my years in the
United States Senate that it is to men like Congressman Bingham, who steered
the Amendment through the House, and Senator Howard, who introduced it in the
Senate, that members of Congress look when they seek the real meaning of what
is being offered. And they vote for or against a bill based on what the
sponsors of that bill and those who oppose it tell them it means. The
historical appendix to my Adamson dissent leaves no doubt in my mind that both
its sponsors and those who opposed it believed the Fourteenth Amendment made
the first eight Amendments of the Constitution (the Bill of Rights) applicable
to the States.

33

In addition to the adoption of Professor Fairman's 'history,' the dissent
states that 'the great words of the four clauses of the first section of the
Fourteenth Amendment would have been an exceedingly peculiar way to say that
'The rights heretofore guaranteed against federal intrusion by the first eight
Amendments are henceforth guaranteed against state intrusion as well."
Dissenting opinion, n. 9. In response to this I can say only that the words
'No State shall make or enforce any law which shall abridge the privileges or
immunities of citizens of the United States' seem to me an eminently
reasonable way of expressing the idea that henceforth the Bill of Rights shall
apply to the States.1 What more precious 'privilege' of American citizenship
could there be than that privilege to claim the protections of our great Bill
of Rights? I suggest that any reading of 'privileges or immunities of citizens
of the United States' which excludes the Bill of Rights' safeguards renders
the words of this section of the Fourteenth Amendment meaningless. Senator
Howard, who introduced the Fourteenth Amendment for passage in the Senate,
certainly read the words this way. Although I have cited his speech at length
in my Adamson dissent appendix, I believe it would be worthwhile to reproduce
a part of it here.

34

'Such is the character of the privileges and immunities spoken of in the
second section of the fourth article of the Constitution (the Senator had just
read from the old opinion of Corfield v. Coryell, 6 Fed.Cas. 546, No. 3,230
(E.D.Pa.1825)). To these privileges and immunities, whatever they may be--for
they are not and cannot be fully defined in their entire extent and precise
nature--to these should be added the personal rights guarantied and secured by
the first eight amendments of the Constitution; such as the freedom of speech
and of the press; the right of the people peaceably to assemble and petition
the Government for a redress of grievances, a right appertaining to each and
all the people; the right to keep and to bear arms; the right to be exempted
from the quartering of soldiers in a house without the consent of the owner;
the right to be exempt from unreasonable searches and seizures, and from any
search or seizure except by virtue of a warrant issued upon a formal oath or
affidavit; the right of an accused person to be informed of the nature of the
accusation against him, and his right to be tried by an impartial jury of the
vicinage; and also the right to be secure against excessive bail and against
cruel and unusual punishments.

35

'Now, sir, here is a mass of privileges, immunities and rights, some of them
secured by the second section of the fourth article of the Constitution, which
I have recited, some by the first eight amendments of the Constitution; and it
is a fact well worthy of attention that the course of decision of our courts
and the present settled doctrine is, that all these immunities, privileges,
rights, thus guarantied by the Constitution or recognized by it, are secured
to the citizens solely as a citizen of the United States and as a party in
their courts. They do not operate in the slightest degree as a restraint or
prohibition upon State legislation. * * *

36

'* * * The great object of the first section of this amendment is, therefore,
to restrain the power of the States and compel them at all times to respect
these great fundamental guarantees.' Cong. Globe, 39th Cong., 1st Sess., 2765
--2766 (1866).

37

From this I conclude, contrary to my Brother HARLAN, that if anything, it is
'exceedingly peculiar' to read the Fourteenth Amendment differently from the
way I do.

38

While I do not wish at this time to discuss at length my disagreement with
Brother HARLAN'S forthright and frank restatement of the now discredited
Twining doctrine,2 I do want to point out what appears to me to be the basic
difference between us. His view, as was indeed the view of Twining, is that
'due process is an evolving concept' and therefore that it entails a 'gradual
process of judicial inclusion and exclusion' to ascertain those 'immutable
principles * * * of free government which no member of the Union may
disregard.' Thus the Due Process Clause is treated as prescribing no specific
and clearly ascertainable constitutional command that judges must obey in
interpreting the Constitution, but rather as leaving judges free to decide at
any particular time whether a particular rule or judicial formulation embodies
an 'immutable principl(e) of free government' or is 'implicit in the concept
of ordered liberty,' or whether certain conduct 'shocks the judge's
conscience' or runs counter to some other similar, undefined and undefinable
standard. Thus due process, according to my Brother HARLAN, is to be a phrase
with no permanent meaning, but one which is found to shift from time to time
in accordance with judges' predilections and understandings of what is best
for the country. If due process means this, the Fourteenth Amendment, in my
opinion, might as well have been written that 'no person shall be deprived of
life, liberty or property except by laws that the judges of the United States
Supreme Court shall find to be consistent with the immutable principles of
free government.' It is impossible for me to believe that such unconfined
power is given to judges in our Constitution that is a written one in order to
limit governmental power.

39

Another tenet of the Twining doctrine as restated by my Brother HARLAN is that
'due process of law requires only fundamental fairness.' But the 'fundamental
fairness' test is one on a par with that of shocking the conscience of the
Court. Each of such tests depends entirely on the particular judge's idea of
ethics and morals instead of requiring him to depend on the boundaries fixed
by the written words of the Constitution. Nothing in the history of the phrase
'due process of law' suggests that constitutional controls are to depend on
any particular judge's sense of values. The origin of the Due Process Clause
is Chapter 39 of Magna Carta which declares that 'No free man shall be taken,
outlawed, banished, or in any way destroyed, nor will We proceed against or
prosecute him, except by the lawful judgment of his peers and by the law of
the land.'3 (Emphasis added.) As early as 1354 the words 'due process of law'
were used in an English statute interpreting Magna Carta,4 and by the end of
the 14th century 'due process of law' and 'law of the land' were
interchangeable. Thus the origin of this clause was an attempt by those who
wrote Magna Carta to do away with the so-called trials of that period where
people were liable to sudden arrest and summary conviction in courts and by
judicial commissions with no sure and definite procedural protections and
under laws that might have been improvised to try their particular cases.
Chapter 39 of Magna Carta was a guarantee that the government would take
neither life, liberty, nor property without a trial in accord with the law of
the land that already existed at the time the alleged offense was committed.
This means that the Due Process Clause gives all Americans, whoever they are
and wherever they happen to be, the right to be tried by independent and
unprejudiced courts using established procedures and applying valid pre-
existing laws. There is not one word of legal history that justifies making
the term 'due process of law' mean a guarantee of a trial free from laws and
conduct which the courts deem at the time to be 'arbitrary,' 'unreasonable,'
'unfair,' or 'contrary to civilized standards.' The due process of law
standard for a trial is one in accordance with the Bill of Rights and laws
passed pursuant to constitutional power, guaranteeing to all alike a trial
under the general law of the land.

40

Finally I want to add that I am not bothered by the argument that applying the
Bill of Rights to the States 'according to the same standards that protect
those personal rights against federal encroachment,'5 interferes with our
concept of federalism in that it may prevent States from trying novel social
and economic experiments. I have never believed that under the guise of
federalism the States should be able to experiment with the protections
afforded our citizens through the Bill of Rights. As Justice Goldberg said so
wisely in his concurring opinion in Pointer v. State of Texas, 380 U.S. 400,
85 S.Ct. 1065, 13 L.Ed.2d 923:

41

'to deny to the States the power to impair a fundamental constitutional right
is not to increase federal power, but, rather, to limit the power of both
federal and state governments in favor of safeguarding the fundamental rights
and liberties of the individual. In my view this promotes rather than
undermines the basic policy of avoiding excess concentration of power in
government, federal or state, which underlies our concepts of federalism.' 380
U.S., at 414, 85 S.Ct., at 1073.

42

It seems to me totally inconsistent to advocates on the one hand, the power of
this Court to strike down any state law or practice which it finds
'unreasonable' or 'unfair' and, on the other hand, urge that the States be
given maximum power to develop their own laws and procedures. Yet the due
process approach of my Brothers HARLAN and FORTAS (see other concurring
opinion, post, p. 211.) does just that since in effect it restricts the States
to practices which a majority of this Court is willing to approve on a case-
by-case basis. No one is more concerned than I that the States be allowed to
use the full scope of their powers as their citizens sees fit. And that is why
I have continually fought against the expansion of this Court's authority over
the States through the use of a broad, general interpretation of due process
that permits judges to strike down state laws they do not like.

43

In closing I want to emphasize that I believe as strongly as ever that the
Fourteenth Amendment was intended to make the Bill of Rights applicable to the
States. I have been willing to support the selective incorporation doctrine,
however, as an alternative, although perhaps less historically supportable
than complete incorporation. The selective incorporation process, if used
properly, does limit the Supreme Court in the Fourteenth Amendment field to
specific Bill of Rights' protections only and keeps judges from roaming at
will in their own notions of what policies outside the Bill of Rights are
desirable and what are not. And, most importantly for me, the selective
incorporation process has the virtue of having already worked to make most of
the Bill of Rights' protections applicable to the States.

44

Mr. Justice HARLAN, whom Mr. Justice STEWART joins, dissenting.

45

Every American jurisdiction provides for trial by jury in criminal cases. The
question before us is not whether jury trial is an ancient institution, which
it is; nor whether it plays a significant role in the administration of
criminal justice, which it does; nor whether it will endure, which it shall.
The question in this case is whether the State of Louisiana, which provides
trial by jury for all felonies, is prohibited by the Constitution from trying
charges of simple battery to the court alone. In my view, the answer to that
question, mandated alike by our constitutional history and by the longer
history of trial by jury, is clearly 'no.'

46

The States have always borne primary responsibility for operating the
machinery of criminal justice within their borders, and adapting it to their
particular circumstances. In exercising this responsibility, each State is
compelled to conform its procedures to the requirements of the Federal
Constitution. The Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment requires that
those procedures be fundamentally fair in all respects. It does not, in my
view, impose or encourage nationwide uniformity for its own sake; it does not
command adherence to forms that happen to be old; and it does not impose on
the States the rules that may be in force in the federal courts except where
such rules are also found to be essential to basic fairness.

47

The Court's approach to this case is an uneasy and illogical compromise among
the views of various Justices on how the Due Process Clause should be
interpreted. The Court does not say that those who framed the Fourteenth
Amendment intended to make the Sixth Amendment applicable to the States. And
the Court concedes that it finds nothing unfair about the procedure by which
the present appellant was tried. Nevertheless, the Court reverses his
conviction: it holds, for some reason not apparent to me, that the Due Process
Clause incorporates the particular clause of the Sixth Amendment that requires
trial by jury in federal criminal cases including, as I read its opinion, the
sometimes trivial accompanying baggage of judicial interpretation in federal
contexts. I have raised my voice many times before against the Court's
continuing undiscriminating insistence upon fastening on the States federal
notions of criminal justice,1 and I must do so again in this instance. With
all respect, the Court's approach and its reading of history are altogether
topsy-turvy.

I.

48

I believe I am correct in saying that every member of the Court for at least
the last 135 years has agreed that our Founders did not consider the
requirements of the Bill of Rights so fundamental that they should operate
directly against the States.2 They were wont to believe rather that the
security of liberty in America rested primarily upon the dispersion of
governmental power across a federal system.3 The Bill of Rights was considered
unnecessary by some4 but insisted upon by others in order to curb the
possibility of abuse of power by the strong central government they were
creating.5

49

The Civil War Amendments dramatically altered the relation of the Federal
Government to the States. The first section of the Fourteenth Amendment
imposes highly significant restrictions on state action. But the restrictions
are couched in very broad and general terms: citizenship; privileges and
immunities; due process of law; equal protection of the laws. Consequently,
for 100 years this Court has been engaged in the difficult process Professor
Jaffe has well called 'the search for intermediate premises.'6 The question
has been, Where does the Court properly look to find the specific rules that
define and give content to such terms as 'life, liberty, or property' and 'due
process of law'?

50

A few members of the Court have taken the position that the intention of those
who drafted the first section of the Fourteenth Amendment was simply, and
exclusively, to make the provisions of the first eight Amendments applicable
to state action.7 This view has never been accepted by this Court. In my view,
often expressed elsewhere,8 the first section of the Fourteenth Amendment was
meant neither to incorporate, nor to be limited to, the specific guarantees of
the first eight Amendments. The overwhelming historical evidence marshalled by
Professor Fairman demonstrates, to me conclusively, that the Congressmen and
state legislators who wrote, debated, and ratified the Fourteenth Amendment
did not think they were 'incorporating' the Bill of Rights9 and the very
breadth and generality of the Amendment's provisions suggest that its authors
did not suppose that the Nation would always be limited to mid-19th century
conceptions of 'liberty' and 'due process of law' but that the increasing
experience and evolving conscience of the American people would add new
'intermediate premises.' In short, neither history, nor sense, supports using
the Fourteenth Amendment to put the States in a constitutional straitjacket
with respect to their own development in the administration of criminal or
civil law.

51

Although I therefore fundamentally disagree with the total incorporation view
of the Fourteenth Amendment, it seems to me that such a position does at least
have the virtue, lacking in the Court's selective incorporation approach, of
internal consistency: we look to the Bill of Rights, word for word, clause for
clause, precedent for precedent because, it is said, the men who wrote the
Amendment wanted it that way. For those who do not accept this 'history,' a
different source of 'intermediate premises' must be found. The Bill of Rights
is not necessarily irrelevant to the search for guidance in interpreting the
Fourteenth Amendment, but the reason for and the nature of its relevance must
be articulated.

52

Apart from the approach taken by the absolute incorporationists, I can see
only one method of analysis that has any internal logic. That is to start with
the words 'liberty' and 'due process of law' and attempt to define them in a
way that accords with American traditions and our system of government. This
approach, involving a much more discriminating process of adjudication than
does 'incorporation,' is, albeit difficult, the one that was followed
throughout the 19th and most of the present century. It entails a 'gradual
process of judicial inclusion and exclusion,'10 seeking, with due recognition
of constitutional tolerance for state experimentation and disparity, to
ascertain those 'immutable principles * * * of justice which inhere in the
very idea of free government which no member of the Union may disregard.'11
Due process was not restricted to rules fixed in the past, for that 'would be
to deny every quality of the law but its age, and to render it incapable of
progress or improvement.'12 Nor did it impose nationwide uniformity in
details, for

53

'(t)he Fourteenth Amendment does not profess to secure to all persons in the
United States the benefit of the same laws and the same remedies. Great
diversities in these respects may exist in two States separated only by an
imaginary line. On one side of this line there may be a right of trial by
jury, and on the other side no such right. Each State prescribes its own modes
of judicial proceeding.'13

54

Through this gradual process, this Court sought to define 'liberty' by
isolating freedoms that Americans of the past and of the present considered
more important than any suggested contervailing public objective. The Court
also, by interpretation of the phrase 'due process of law,' enforced the
Constitution's guarantee that no State may imprison an individual except by
fair and impartial procedures.

55

The relationship of the Bill of Rights to this 'gradual process' seems to me
to be twofold. In the first place it has long been clear that the Due Process
Clause imposes some restrictions on state action that parallel Bill of Rights
restrictions on federal action. Second, and more important than this
accidental overlap, is the fact that the Bill of Rights is evidence, at
various points, of the content Americans find in the term 'liberty' and of
American standards of fundamental fairness.

56

An example, both of the phenomenon of parallelism and the use of the first
eight Amendments as evidence of a historic commitment, is found in the partial
definition of 'liberty' offered by Mr. Justice Holmes, dissenting in Gitlow v.
People of State of New York, 268 U.S. 652, 45 S.Ct. 625, 69 L.Ed. 1138.

57

'The general principle of free speech * * * must be taken to be included in
the Fourteenth Amendment, in view of the scope that has been given to the word
'liberty' as there used, although perhaps it may be accepted with a somewhat
larger latitude of interpretation than is allowed to Congress by the sweeping
language that governs or ought to govern the laws of the United States.' Id.,
at 672, 45 S.Ct., at 632.

58

As another example, Mr. Justice Frankfurter, speaking for the Court in Wolf v.
People of State of Colorado, 338 U.S. 25, 27--28, 69 S.Ct. 1359, 1361, 93
L.Ed. 1782, recognized that

59

'(t)he security of one's privacy against arbitrary intrusion by the police--
which is at the core of the Fourth Amendment--is basic to a free society. It
is therefore implicit in 'the concept of ordered liberty' and as such
enforceable against the States through the Due Process Clause.'

60

The Court has also found among the procedural requirements of 'due process of
law' certain rules paralleling requirements of the first eight Amendments. For
example, in Powell v. State of Alabama, 287 U.S. 45, 53 S.Ct. 55, 77 L.Ed.
158, the Court ruled that a State could not deny counsel to an accused in a
capital case:

61

'The fact that the right involved is of such a character that it cannot be
denied without violating those 'fundamental principles of liberty and justice
which lie at the base of all our civil and political institutions' * * * is
obviously one of those compelling considerations which must prevail in
determining whether it is embraced within the due process clause of the
Fourteenth Amendment, although it be specifically dealt with in another part
of the Federal Constitution.' Id., at 67, 53 S.Ct., at 63. (Emphasis added.)
Later, the right to counsel was extended to all felony cases.14 The Court has
also ruled, for example, that 'due process' means a speedy process, so that
liberty will not be long restricted prior to an adjudication, and evidence of
fact will not become stale;15 that in a system committed to the resolution of
issues of fact by adversary proceedings the right to confront opposing
witnesses must be guaranteed;16 and that if issues of fact are tried to a
jury, fairness demands a jury impartially selected.17 That these requirements
are fundamental to procedural fairness hardly needs redemonstration.

62

In all of these instances, the right guaranteed against the States by the
Fourteenth Amendment was one that had also been guaranteed against the Federal
Government by one of the first eight Amendments. The logically critical thing,
however, was not that the rights had been found in the Bill of Rights, but
that they were deemed, in the context of American legal history, to be
fundamental. This was perhaps best explained by Mr. Justice Cardozo, speaking
for a Court that included Chief Justice Hughes and Justices Brandeis and
Stone, in Palko v. State of Connecticut, 302 U.S. 319, 58 S.Ct. 149, 82 L.Ed.
288:

63

'If the Fourteenth Amendment has absorbed them, the process of absorption has
had its source in the belief that neither liberty nor justice would exist if
they were sacrificed.' Id., at 326, 58 S.Ct., at 152.

64

Referring to Powell v. State of Alabama, supra, Mr. Justice Cardozo continued:

65

'The decision did not turn upon the fact that the benefit of counsel would
have been guaranteed to the defendants by the provisions of the Sixth
Amendment if they had been prosecuted in a federal court. The decision turned
upon the fact that in the particular situation laid before us in the evidence
the benefit of counsel was essential to the substance of a hearing.' Id., at
327, 58 S.Ct., at 153.

66

Mr. Justice Cardozo then went on to explain that the Fourteenth Amendment did
not impose on each State every rule of procedure that some other State, or the
federal courts, thought desirable, but only those rules critical to liberty:

67

'The line of division may seem to be wavering and broken if there is a hasty
catalogue of the cases on the one side and the other. Reflection and analysis
will induce a different view. There emerges the perception of a rationalizing
principle which gives to discrete instances a proper order and coherence. The
right to trial by jury and the immunity from prosecution except as the result
of an indictment may have value and importance. Even so, they are not of the
very essence of a scheme of ordered liberty. To abolish them is not to violate
a 'principle of justice so rooted in the traditions and conscience of our
people as to be ranked as fundamental.' * * * Few would be so narrow or
provincial as to maintain that a fair and enlightened system of justice would
be impossible without them.' Id., at 325, 58 S.Ct., at 152. (Emphasis added.)

68

Today's Court still remains unwilling to accept the total incorporationists'
view of the history of the Fourteenth Amendment. This, if accepted, would
afford a cogent reason for applying the Sixth Amendment to the States. The
Court is also, apparently, unwilling to face the task of determining whether
denial of trial by jury in the situation before us, or in other situations, is
fundamentally unfair. Consequently, the Court has compromised on the ease of
the incorporationist position, without its internal logic. It has simply
assumed that the question before us is whether the Jury Trial Clause of the
Sixth Amendment should be incorporated into the Fourteenth, jot-for-jot and
case-for-case, or ignored. Then the Court merely declares that the clause in
question is 'in' rather than 'out.'18

69

The Court has justified neither its starting place nor its conclusion. If the
problem is to discover and articulate the rules of fundamental fairness in
criminal proceedings, there is no reason to assume that the whole body of
rules developed in this Court constituting Sixth Amendment jury trial must be
regarded as a unit. The requirement of trial by jury in federal criminal cases
has given rise to numerous subsidiary questions respecting the exact scope and
content of the right. It surely cannot be that every answer the Court has
given, or will give, to such a question is attributable to the Founders; or
even that every rule announced carries equal conviction of this Court; still
less can it be that every such subprinciple is equally fundamental to ordered
liberty.

70

Examples abound. I should suppose it obviously fundamental to fairness that a
'jury' means an 'impartial jury.'19 I should think it equally obvious that the
rule, imposed long ago in the federal courts, that 'jury' means 'jury of
exactly twelve,'20 is not fundamental to anything: there is no significance
except to mystics in the number 12. Again, trial by jury has been held to
require a unanimous verdict of jurors in the federal courts,21 although
unanimity has not been found essential to liberty in Britain, where the
requirement has been abandoned.22

71

One further example is directly relevant here. The co-existence of a
requirement of jury trial in federal criminal cases and a historic and
universally recognized exception for 'petty crimes' has compelled this Court,
on occasion, to decide whether a particular crime is petty, or is included
within the guarantee.23 Individual cases have been decided without great
conviction and without reference to a guiding principle. The Court today
holds, for no discernible reason, that if and when the line is drawn its exact
location will be a matter of such fundamental importance that it will be
uniformly imposed on the States. This Court is compelled to decide such
obscure borderline questions in the course of administering federal law. This
does not mean that its decisions are demonstrably sounder than those that
would be reached by state courts and legislatures, let alone that they are of
such importance that fairness demands their imposition throughout the Nation.

72

Even if I could agree that the question before us is whether Sixth Amendment
jury trial is totally 'in' or totally 'out,' I can find in the Court's opinion
no real reasons for concluding that it should be 'in.' The basis for
differentiating among clauses in the Bill of Rights cannot be that only some
clauses are in the Bill of Rights, or that only some are old and much praised,
or that only some have played an important role in the development of federal
law. These things are true of all. The Court says that some clauses are more
'fundamental' than others, but it turns out to be using this word in a sense
that would have astonished Mr. Justice Cardozo and which, in addition, is of
no help. The word does not mean 'analytically critical to procedural fairness'
for no real analysis of the role of the jury in making procedures fair is even
attempted. Instead, the word turns out to mean 'old,' 'much praised,' and
'found in the Bill of Rights.' The definition of 'fundamental' thus turns out
to be circular.

II.

73

Since, as I see it, the Court has not even come to grips with the issues in
this case, it is necessary to start from the beginning. When a criminal
defendant contends that his state conviction lacked 'due process of law,' the
question before this Court, in my view, is whether he was denied any element
of fundamental procedural fairness. Believing, as I do, that due process is an
evolving concept and that old principles are subject to re-evaluation in light
of later experience, I think it appropriate to deal on its merits with the
question whether Louisiana denied appellant due process of law when it tried
him for simple assault without a jury.

74

The obvious starting place is the fact that this Court has, in the past, held
that trial by jury is not a requisite of criminal due process. In the leading
case, Maxwell v. Dow, 176 U.S. 581, 20 S.Ct. 448, 44 L.Ed. 597, Mr. Justice
Peckham wrote as follows for the Court:24

75

'Trial by jury has never been affirmed to be a necessary requisite of due
process of law. * * *

76

'* * * The right to be proceeded against only by indictment, and the right to
a trial by twelve jurors, are of the same nature, and are subject to the same
judgment, and the people in the several States have the same right to provide
by their organic law for the change of both or either. * * * (T)he State has
full control over the procedure in its courts, both in civil and criminal
cases, subject only to the qualification that such procedure must not work a
denial of fundamental rights or conflict with specific and applicable
provisions of the Federal Constitution. The legislation in question is not, in
our opinion, open to either of these objections.' Id., at 603--605, 20 S.Ct.,
at 457--458.

77

In Territory of Hawaii v. Mankichi, 190 U.S. 197, 23 S.Ct. 787, 47 L.Ed. 1016
the question was whether the Territory of Hawaii could continue its
preannexation procedure of permitting conviction by nonunanimous juries. The
Congressional Resolution of Annexation had provided that municipal legislation
of Hawaii that was not contrary to the United States Constitution could remain
in force. The Court interpreted the resolution to mean only that those
requirements of the Constitution that were 'fundamental' would be binding in
the Territory. After concluding that a municipal statute allowing a conviction
of treason on circumstantial evidence would violate a 'fundamental' guarantee
of the Constitution, the Court continued:

78

'We would even go farther, and say that most, if not all, the privileges and
immunities contained in the bill of rights of the Constitution were intended
to apply from the moment of annexation; but we place our decision of this case
upon the ground that the two rights alleged to be violated in this case (Sixth
Amendment jury trial and grand jury indictment) are not fundamental in their
nature, but concern merely a method of procedure which sixty years of practice
had shown to be suited to the conditions of the islands, and well calculated
to conserve the rights of their citizens to their lives, their property and
their wellbeing.' Id., at 217--218, 23 S.Ct., at 791.

79

Numerous other cases in this Court have assumed that jury trial is not
fundamental to ordered liberty.25

80

Although it is of course open to this Court to re-examine these decisions, I
can see no reason why they should now be overturned. It can hardly be said
that time has altered the question, or brought significant new evidence to
bear upon it. The virtues and defects of the jury system have been hotly
debated for a long time,26 and are hotly debated today, without significant
change in the lines of argument.27

81

The argument that jury trial is not a requisite of due process is quite
simple. The central proposition of Palko, supra, a proposition to which I
would adhere, is that 'due process of law' requires only that criminal trials
be fundamentally fair. As stated above, apart from the theory that it was
historically intended as a mere shorthand for the Bill of Rights, I do not see
what else 'due process of law' can intelligibly be thought to mean. If due
process of law requires only fundamental fairness,28 then the inquiry in each
case must be whether a state trial process was a fair one. The Court has held,
properly I think, that in an adversary process it is a requisite of fairness,
for which there is no adequate substitute, that a criminal defendant be
afforded a right to counsel and to cross-examine opposing witnesses. But it
simply has not been demonstrated, nor, I think, can it be demonstrated, that
trial by jury is the only fair means of resolving issues of fact.

82

The jury is of course not without virtues. It affords ordinary citizens a
valuable opportunity to participate in a process of government, an experience
fostering, one hopes, a respect for law.29 It eases the burden on judges by
enabling them to share a part of their sometimes awesome responsibility.30 A
jury may, at times, afford a higher justice by refusing to enforce harsh laws
(although it necessarily does so haphazardly, raising the questions whether
arbitrary enforcement of harsh laws is better than total enforcement, and
whether the jury system is to be defended on the ground that jurors sometimes
disobey their oaths).31 And the jury may, or may not, contribute desirably to
the willingness of the general public to accept criminal judgments as just.32

83

It can hardly be gainsaid, however, that the principal original virtue of the
jury trial--the limitations a jury imposes on a tyrannous judiciary--has
largely disappeared. We no longer live in a medieval or colonial society.
Judges enforce laws enacted by democratic decision, not by regal fiat. They
are elected by the people or appointed by the people's elected officials, and
are responsible not to a distant monarch alone but to reviewing courts,
including this one.33

84

The jury system can also be said to have some inherent defects, which are
multiplied by the emergence of the criminal law from the relative simplicity
that existed when the jury system was devised.34 It is a cumbersome process,
not only imposing great cost in time and money on both the State and the
jurors themselves,35 but also contributing to delay in the machinery of
justice.36 Untrained jurors are presumably less adept at reaching accurate
conclusions of fact than judges, particularly if the issues are many or
complex.37 And it is argued by some that trial by jury, far from increasing
public respect for law, impairs it: the average man, it is said, reacts
favorably neither to the notion that matters he knows to be complex are being
decided by other average men,38 nor to the way the jury system distorts the
process of adjudication.39

85

That trial by jury is not the only fair way of adjudicating criminal guilt is
well attested by the fact that it is not the prevailing way, either in England
or in this country. For England, one expert makes the following estimates.
Parliament generally provides that new statutory offenses, unless they are of
'considerable gravity' shall be tried to judges; consequently, summary
offenses now outnumber offenses for which jury trial is afforded by more than
six to one. Then, within the latter category, 84% of all cases are in fact
tried to the court. Over all, 'the ratio of defendants actually tried by jury
becomes in some years little more than 1 per cent.'40

86

In the United States, where it has not been as generally assumed that jury
waiver is permissible,41 the statistics are only slightly less revealing. Two
experts have estimated that, of all prosecutions for crimes triable to a jury,
75% are settled by guilty plea and 40% of the remainder are tried to the
court.42 In one State, Maryland, which has always provided for waiver, the
rate of court trial appears in some years to have reached 90%.43 The Court
recognizes the force of these statistics in stating,

87

'We would not assert, however, that every criminal trial--or any particular
trial--held before a judge alone is unfair or that a defendant may never be as
fairly treated by a judge as he would be by a jury.' Ante, at 158.

88

I agree. I therefore see no reason why this Court should reverse the
conviction of appellant, absent any suggestion that his particular trial was
in fact unfair, or compel the State of Louisiana to afford jury trial in an as
yet unbounded category of cases that can, without unfairness, be tried to a
court.

89

Indeed, even if I were persuaded that trial by jury is a fundamental right in
some criminal cases, I could see nothing fundamental in the rule, not yet
formulated by the Court, that places the prosecution of appellant for simple
battery within the category of 'jury crimes' rather than 'petty crimes.' Trial
by jury is ancient, it is true. Almost equally ancient, however, is the
discovery that, because of it,

90

'the King's most loving Subjects are much travailed and otherwise encumbered
in coming and keeping of the said six Weeks Sessions, to their Costs, Charges,
Unquietness.'44

91

As a result, through the long course of British and American history, summary
procedures have been used in a varying category of lesser crimes as a flexible
response to the burden jury trial would otherwise impose.

92

The use of summary procedures has long been widespread. British procedure in
1776 exempted from the requirement of jury trial

93

'(v)iolations of the laws relating to liquor, trade and manufacture, labor,
smuggling, traffic on the highway, the Sabbath, 'cheats,' gambling, swearing,
small thefts, assaults, offenses to property, servants and seamen, vagabondage
* * * (and) at least a hundred more * * *.'45 (Emphasis added.)

94

Penalties for such offenses included heavy fines (with imprisonment until they
were paid), whippings, and imprisonment at hard labor.46

95

Nor had the Colonies a cleaner slate, although practices varied greatly from
place to place with conditions. In Massachusetts, crimes punishable by
whipping (up to 10 strokes), the stocks (up to three hours), the ducking
stool, and fines and imprisonment were triable to magistrates.47 The decision
of a magistrate could, in theory, be appealed to a jury, but a stiff
recognizance made exercise of this right quite rare.48 New York was somewhat
harsher. For example, 'anyone adjudged by two magistrates to be an idle,
disorderly or vagrant person might be transported whence he came, and on
reappearance be whipped from constable to constable with thirty-one lashes by
each.'49 Anyone committing a criminal offense 'under the degree of Grand
Larceny' and unable to furnish bail within 48 hours could be summarily tried
by three justices.50 With local variations, examples could be multiplied.

96

The point is not that many offenses that English-speaking communities have, at
one time or another, regarded as triable without a jury are more serious, and
carry more serious penalties, than the one involved here. The point is rather
that until today few people would have thought the exact location of the line
mattered very much. There is no obvious reason why a jury trial is a requisite
of fundamental fairness when the charge is robbery, and not a requisite of
fairness when the same defendant, for the same actions, is charged with
assault and petty theft.51 The reason for the historic exception for
relatively minor crimes is the obvious one: the burden of jury trial was
thought to outweigh its marginal advantages. Exactly why the States should not
be allowed to make continuing adjustments, based on the state of their
criminal dockets and the difficulty of summoning jurors, simply escapes me.

97

In sum, there is a wide range of views on the desirability of trial by jury,
and on the ways to make it most effective when it is used; there is also
considerable variation from State to State in local conditions such as the
size of the criminal caseload, the ease or difficulty of summoning jurors, and
other trial conditions bearing on fairness. We have before us, therefore, an
almost perfect example of a situation in which the celebrated dictum of Mr.
Justice Brandeis should be invoked. It is, he said,

98

'one of the happy incidents of the federal system that a single courageous
state may, if its citizens choose, serve as a laboratory * * *.' New State Ice
Co. v. Liebmann, 285 U.S. 262, 280, 311, 52 S.Ct. 371, 386, 76 L.Ed. 747
(dissenting opinion).

99

This Court, other courts, and the political process are available to correct
any experiments in criminal procedure that prove fundamentally unfair to
defendants. That is not what is being done today: instead, and quite without
reason, the Court has chosen to impose upon every State one means of trying
criminal cases; it is a good means, but it is not the only fair means, and it
is not demonstrably better than the alternatives States might devise.

100

I would affirm the judgment of the Supreme Court of Louisiana.

1

La.Const., Art. VII, ยง 41:

'All cases in which the punishment may not be at hard labor shall * * * be
tried by the judge without a jury. Cases, in which the punishment may be at
hard labor, shall be tried by a jury of five, all of whom must concur to
render a verdict; cases, in which the punishment is necessarily at hard labor,
by a jury of twelve, nine of whom must concur to render a verdict; cases in
which the punishment may be capital, by a jury of twelve, all of whom must
concur to render a verdict.'

La.Rev.Stat. ยง 14:35 (1950):

'Simple battery is a battery, without the consent of the victim, committed
without a dangerous weapon.

'Whoever commits a simple battery shall be fined not more than three hundred
dollars, or imprisoned for not more than two years, or both.'

2

250 La. 253, 195 So.2d 142 (1967).

3

389 U.S. 809, 88 S.Ct. 98, 19 L.Ed.2d 63 (1967).

4

Chicago, B. & Q.R. Co. v. City of Chicago, 166 U.S. 226, 17 S.Ct. 581, 41
L.Ed. 979 (1897).

5

See, e.g., Fiske v. State of Kansas, 274 U.S. 380, 47 S.Ct. 655, 71 L.Ed. 1108
(1927).

6

See Mapp v. State of Ohio, 367 U.S. 643, 81 S.Ct. 1684, 6 L.Ed.2d 1081 (1961).

7

Malloy v. Hogan, 378 U.S. 1, 84 S.Ct. 1489, 12 L.Ed.2d 653 (1964).

8

Gideon v. Wainwright, 372 U.S. 335, 83 S.Ct. 792, 9 L.Ed.2d 799 (1963).

9

Klopfer v. State of North Carolina, 386 U.S. 213, 87 S.Ct. 988, 18 L.Ed.2d 1
(1967).

10

In re Oliver, 333 U.S. 257, 68 S.Ct. 499, 92 L.Ed. 682 (1948).

11

Pointer v. State of Texas, 380 U.S. 400, 85 S.Ct. 1065, 13 L.Ed.2d 923 (1965).

12

Washington v. State of Texas, 388 U.S. 14, 87 S.Ct. 1920, 18 L.Ed.2d 1019
(1967).

13

Quoting from Hebert v. State of Louisiana, 272 U.S. 312, 316, 47 S.Ct. 103,
104, 71 L.Ed. 270 (1926).

14

In one sense recent cases applying provisions of the first eight Amendments to
the States represent a new approach to the 'incorporation' debate. Earlier the
Court can be seen as having asked, when inquiring into whether some particular
procedural safeguard was required of a State, if a civilized system could be
imagined that would not accord the particular protection. For example, Palko
v. State of Connecticut, 302 U.S. 319, 325, 58 S.Ct. 149, 152, 82 L.Ed. 288
(1937), stated: 'The right to trial by jury and the immunity from prosecution
except as the result of an indictment may have value and importance. Even so,
they are not of the very essence of a scheme of ordered liberty. * * * Few
would be so narrow or provincial as to maintain that a fair and enlightened
system of justice would be impossible without them.' The recent cases, on the
other hand, have proceeded upon the valid assumption that state criminal
processes are not imaginary and theoretical schemes but actual systems bearing
virtually every characteristic of the common-law system that has been
developing contemporaneously in England and in this country. The question thus
is whether given this kind of system a particular procedure is

fundamental--whether, that is, a procedure is necessary to an Anglo-American
regime of ordered liberty. It is this sort of inquiry that can justify the
conclusions that state courts must exclude evidence seized in violation of the
Fourth Amendment, Mapp v. State of Ohio, 367 U.S. 643, 81 S.Ct. 1684, 6
L.Ed.2d 1081 (1961); that state prosecutors may not comment on a defendant's
failure to testify, Griffin v. State of California, 380 U.S. 609, 85 S.Ct.
1229, 14 L.Ed.2d 106 (1965); and that criminal punishment may not be imposed
for the status of narcotics addiction, Robinson v. State of California, 370
U.S. 660, 82 S.Ct. 1417, 8 L.Ed.2d 758 (1962). Of immediate relevance for this
case are the Court's holdings that the States must comply with certain
provisions of the Sixth Amendment, specifically that the States may not refuse
a speedy trial, confrontation of witnesses, and the assistance, at state
expense if necessary, of counsel. See cases cited in nn. 8 12, supra. Of each
of these determinations that a constitutional provision originally written to
bind the Federal Government should bind the States as well it might be said
that the limitation in question is not necessarily fundamental to fairness in
every criminal system that might be imagined but is fundamental in the context
of the criminal processes maintained by the American States.

When the inquiry is approached in this way the question whether the States can
impose criminal punishment without granting a jury trial appears quite
different from the way it appeared in the older cases opining that States
might abolish jury trial. See, e.g., Maxwell v. Dow, 176 U.S. 581, 20 S.Ct.
448, 44 L.Ed. 597 (1900). A criminal process which was fair and equitable but
used no juries is easy to imagine. It would make use of alternative guarantees
and protections which would serve the purposes that the jury serves in the
English and American systems. Yet no American State has undertaken to
construct such a system. Instead, every American State, including Louisiana,
uses the jury extensively, and imposes very serious punishments only after a
trial at which the defendant has a right to a jury's verdict. In every State,
including Louisiana, the structure and style of the criminal process--the
supporting framework and the subsidiary procedures--are of the sort that
naturally complement jury trial, and have developed in connection with and in
reliance upon jury trial.

15

E.g., W. Forsyth, History of Trial by Jury (1852); J. Thayer, A. Preliminary
Treatise on Evidence at the Common Law (1898); W. Holdsworth, History of
English Law.

16

E.g., 4 W. Blackstone, Commentaries on the Laws of England 349 (Cooley ed.
1899). Historians no longer accept this pedigree. See, e.g., 1 F. Pollock & F.
Maitland, The History of English Law Before the Time of Edward I, at 173, n. 3
(2d ed. 1909).

17

Blackstone, supra, at 349--350.

18

R. Perry, ed., Sources of Our Liberties 270 (1959).

19

Id., at 288.

20

Among the proposed amendments adopted by the House of Representatives in 1789
and submitted to the Senate was Article Fourteen:

'No State shall infringe the right of trial by Jury in criminal cases, nor the
rights of conscience, nor the freedom of speech, or of the press.'

The Senate deleted this article in adopting the amendments which became the
Bill of Rights. Journal of the First Session of the Senate 72; 1 Annals of
Congress 76; Brennan, The Bill of Rights and the States, in E. Cahn, The Great
Rights 65, 69 (1963); E. Dumbauld, The Bill of Rights 46, 215 (1957). This
relatively clear indication that the framers of the Sixth Amendment did not
intend its jury trial requirement to bind the States is, of course, of little
relevance to interpreting the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment,
adopted specifically to place limitations upon the States. Cf. Fiske v. State
of Kansas, 274 U.S. 380, 47 S.Ct. 655, 71 L.Ed. 1108 (1927); Gitlow v. People
of State of New York, 268 U.S. 652, 666, 45 S.Ct. 625, 629 (1925).

21

Thompson v. State of Utah, 170 U.S. 343, 349--350, 18 S.Ct. 620, 622, 42 L.Ed.
1061 (1898), quoting 2 J. Story, Commentaries on the Constitution of the
United States ยง 1779\. See also Irvin v. Dowd, 366 U.S. 717, 721--722, 81
S.Ct. 1639, 1641 1642, 6 L.Ed.2d 651 (1961); United States ex rel. Toth v.
Quarles, 350 U.S. 11, 16, 76 S.Ct. 1, 4, 100 L.Ed. 8 (1955); Ex parte
Milligan, 4 Wall. 2, 122--123, 18 L.Ed. 281 (1866); People v. Garbutt, 17
Mich. 9, 27 (1868).

22

Proposed Maryland Constitution, Art. 1, ยง 1.07 (defeated at referendum May 14,
1968); Michigan Constitution, Art. 1, ยง 14; Proposed New York Constitution,
Art. 1, ยง 7b (defeated at referendum Nov. 7, 1967).

23

'The (jury trial) clause was clearly intended to protect the accused from
oppression by the Government * * *.' Singer v. United States, 380 U.S. 24, 31,
83 S.Ct. 783, 788, 13 L.Ed.2d 630 (1965). 'The first object of any tyrant in
Whitehall would be to make Parliament utterly subservient to his will; and the
next to overthrow or diminish trial by jury, for no tyrant could afford to
leave a subject's freedom in the hands of twelve of his countrymen. So that
trial by jury is more than an instrument of justice and more than one wheel of
the constitution: it is the lamp that shows that freedom lives.' P. Devlin,
Trial by Jury 164 (1956).

24

A thorough summary of the arguments that have been made for and against jury
trial and an extensive bibliography of the relevant literature is available at
Hearings on Recording of Jury Deliberations before the Subcommittee to
Investigate the Administration of the Internal Security Act of the Senate
Committee on the Judiciary, 84th Cong., 1st Sess., 63--81 (1955). A more
selective bibliography appears at H. Kalven, Jr. & H. Zeisel, The American
Jury 4, n. 2 (1966).

25

E.g., J. Frank, Courts on Trial 145 (1949); H. Sidgwick, The Elements of
Politics 498 (4th ed. 1919).

26

Kalven & Zeisel, n. 24, supra.

27

See Patton v. United States, 281 U.S. 276, 50 S.Ct. 253, 74 L.Ed. 854 (1930).

28

See Part II, infra.

29

Kalven & Zeisel, n. 24, supra, c. 2.

30

Louisiana also asserts that if due process is deemed to include the right to
jury trial, States will be obligated to comply with all past interpretations
of the Sixth Amendment, an amendment which in its inception was designed to
control only the federal courts and which throughout its history has operated
in this limited environment where uniformity is a more obvious and immediate
consideration. In particular, Louisiana objects to application of the
decisions of this Court interpreting the Sixth Amendment as guaranteeing a
12-man jury in serious criminal cases, Thompson v. State of Utah, 170 U.S.
343, 18 S.Ct. 620, 42 L.Ed. 1061 (1898); as requiring a unanimous verdict
before guilt can be found, Maxwell v. Dow, 176 U.S. 581, 586, 20 S.Ct. 448,
450, 44 L.Ed. 597 (1900); and as barring procedures by which crimes subject to
the Sixth Amendment jury trial provision are tried in the first instance
without a jury but at the first appellate stage by de novo trial with a jury,
Callan v. Wilson, 127 U.S. 540, 557, 8 S.Ct. 1301, 1307, 32 L.Ed. 223 (1888).
It seems very unlikely to us that our decision today will require widespread
changes in state criminal processes. First, our decisions interpreting the
Sixth Amendment are always subject to reconsideration, a fact amply
demonstrated by the instant decision. In addition, most of the States have
provisions for jury trials equal in breadth to the Sixth Amendment, if that
amendment is construed, as it has been, to permit the trial of petty crimes
and offenses without a jury. Indeed, there appear to be only four States in
which juries of fewer than 12 can be used without the defendant's consent for
offenses carrying a maximum penalty of greater than one year. Only in Oregon
and Louisiana can a less-than-unanimous jury convict for an offense with a
maximum penalty greater than one year. However 10 States authorize first-stage
trials without juries for crimes carrying lengthy penalties; these States give
a convicted defendant the right to a de novo trial before a jury in a
different court. The statutory provisions are listed in the briefs filed in
this case.

31

Cheff v. Schnackenberg, 384 U.S. 373, 86 S.Ct. 1523, 16 L.Ed.2d 629 (1966);
District of Columbia v. Clawans, 300 U.S. 617, 57 S.Ct. 660, 81 L.Ed. 843
(1937); Schick v. United States, 195 U.S. 65, 24 S.Ct. 826, 49 L.Ed. 99
(1904); Natal v. State of Louisiana, 139 U.S. 621, 11 S.Ct. 636, 35 L.Ed. 288
(1891); see Callan v. Wilson, 127 U.S. 540, 8 S.Ct. 1301, 32 L.Ed. 223 (1888).
See generally Frankfurter & Corcoran, Petty Federal Offenses and the
Constitutional Guaranty of Trial by Jury, 39 Harv.L.Rev. 917 (1926); Kaye,
Petty Offenders Have No Peers!, 26 U.Chi.L.Rev. 245 (1959).

32

18 U.S.C. ยง 1.

33

Indeed, there appear to be only two instances, aside from the Louisiana
scheme, in which a State denies jury trial for a crime punishable by
imprisonment for longer than six months. New Jersey's disorderly conduct
offense, N.J.Stat.Ann. ยง 2A:169--4 (1953), carries one-year maximum sentence
but no jury trial. The denial of jury trial was upheld by a 4--3 vote against
state constitutional attack in State v. Maier, 13 N.J. 235, 99 A.2d 21 (1953).
New York State provides a jury within New York City only for offenses bearing
a maximum sentence greater than one year. See People v. Sanabria, 42 Misc.2d
464, 249 N.Y.S.2d 66 (Sup.Ct.1964).

34

Frankfurter & Corcoran, n. 31, supra. In the instant case Louisiana has not
argued that a penalty of two years' imprisonment is sufficiently short to
qualify as a 'petty offense,' but only that the penalty actually imposed on
Duncan, imprisonment for 60 days, is within the petty offense category.

35

It is argued that Cheff v. Schnackenberg, 384 U.S. 373, 86 S.Ct. 1523, 16
L.Ed.2d 629 (1966), interpreted the Sixth Amendment as meaning that to the
extent that the length of punishment is a relevant criterion in distinguishing
between serious crimes and petty offenses, the critical factor is not the
length of the sentence authorized but the length of the penalty actually
imposed. In our view that case does not reach the situation where a
legislative judgment as to the seriousness of the crime is imbedded in the
statute in the form of an express authorization to impose a heavy penalty for
the crime in question. Cheff involved criminal contempt, an offense applied to
a wide range of conduct including conduct not so serious as to require jury
trial absent a long sentence. In addition criminal contempt is unique in that
legislative bodied frequently authorize punishment without stating the extent
of the penalty which can be imposed. The contempt statute under which Cheff
was prosecuted, 18 U.S.C. ยง 401, treated the extent of punishment as a matter
to be determined by the forum court. It is therefore understandable that this
Court in Cheff seized upon the penalty actually imposed as the best evidence
of the seriousness of the offense for which Cheff was tried.

1

My view has been and is that the Fourteenth Amendment, as a whole, makes the
Bill of Rights applicable to the States. This would certainly include the
language of the Privileges and Immunities Clause, as well as the Due Process
Clause.

2

For a more thorough exposition of my views against this approach to the Due
Process Clause, see my concurring opinion in Rochin v. People of State of
California, 342 U.S. 165, 174, 72 S.Ct. 205, 210, 96 L.Ed. 183.

3

See Murray's Lessee v. Hoboken Land and Improvement Co., 18 How. 272, 276, 15
L.Ed. 372.

4

28 Edw. 3, c. 3 (1354).

5

See Malloy v. Hogan, 378 U.S. 1, 10, 84 S.Ct. 1489, 1495, 12 L.Ed.2d 653;
Pointer v. State of Texas, 380 U.S. 400, 406, 85 S.Ct. 1065, 1069, 13 L.Ed.2d
923; Miranda v. State of Arizona, 384 U.S. 436, 464, 86 S.Ct. 1602, 1622, 16
L.Ed.2d 694.

1

See, e.g., my opinions in Mapp v. Ohio, 367 U.S. 643, 672, 81 S.Ct. 1684,
1700, 6 L.Ed.2d 1081 (dissenting); Ker v. State of California, 374 U.S. 23,
44, 83 S.Ct. 1623, 1635, 10 L.Ed.2d 726 (concurring); Malloy v. Hogan, 378
U.S. 1, 14, 84 S.Ct. 1489, 1497, 12 L.Ed.2d 653 (dissenting); Pointer v. State
of Texas, 380 U.S. 400, 408, 85 S.Ct. 1065, 1070, 13 L.Ed.2d 923 (concurring);
Griffin v. State of California, 380 U.S. 609, 615, 85 S.Ct. 1229, 1233, 14
L.Ed.2d 106 (concurring); Klopfer v. State of North Carolina, 386 U.S. 213,
226, 87 S.Ct. 988, 995, 18 L.Ed.2d 1 (concurring).

2

Barron, for Use of Tiernan v. Mayor and City Council of City of Baltimore, 7
Pet. 243, 8 L.Ed. 672 (1833), held that the first eight Amendments restricted
only federal action.

3

The locus classicus for this viewpoint is The Federalist No. 51 (Madison).

4

The Bill of Rights was opposed by Hamilton and other proponents of a strong
central government. See The Federalist No. 84; see generally C. Rossiter,
1787: The Grand Convention 284, 302 303.

5

In Barron, for Use of Tiernan v. Mayor and City Council of City of Baltimore,
supra, 7 Pet. at 250, Chief Justice Marshall said, 'These amendments demanded
security against the apprehended encroachments of the general government--not
against those of the local governments.'

6

Jaffe, Was Brandeis an Activist? The Search for Intermediate Premises, 80
Harv.L.Rev. 986 (1967).

7

See Adamson v. People v. State of California, 332 U.S. 46, 71, 67 S.Ct. 1672,
1686, 91 L.Ed. 1903 (dissenting opinion of BLACK, J.); O'Neil v. State of
Vermont, 144 U.S. 323, 366, 370, 12 S.Ct. 693, 709, 711, 36 L.Ed. 450
(dissenting opinion of Harlan, J.) (1892); H. Black, 'Due Process of Law,' in
a Constitutional Faith 23 (1968).

8

In addition to the opinions cited in n. 1, supra, see, e.g., my opinions in
Poe v. Ullman, 367 U.S. 497, 522, at 539--545, 81 S.Ct. 1752, 1774--1778, 6
L.Ed.2d 989 (dissenting), and Griswold v. State of Connecticut, 381 U.S. 479,
499, 85 S.Ct. 1678, 1689, 14 L.Ed.2d 510 (concurring).

9

Fairman, Does the Fourteenth Amendment Incorporate the Bill of Rights? The
Original Understanding, 2 Stan.L.Rev. 5 (1949). professor Fairman was not
content to rest upon the overwhelming

fact that the great words of the four clauses of the first section of the
Fourteenth Amendment would have been an exceedingly peculiar way to say that
'The rights heretofore guaranteed against federal intrusion by the first eight
Amendments are henceforth guaranteed against state intrusion as well.' He
therefore sifted the mountain of material comprising the debates and committee
reports relating to the Amendment in both Houses of Congress and in the state
legislatures that passed upon it. He found that in the immense corpus of
comments on the purpose and effects of the proposed amendment, and on its
virtues and defects, there is almost no evidence whatever for 'incorporation.'
The first eight Amendments are so much as mentioned by only two members of
Congress, one of whom effectively demonstrated (a) that he did not understand
Barron, for Use of Tiernan v. Mayor and City Council of City of Baltimore, 7
Pet. 243, 8 L.Ed. 672, and therefore did not understand the question of
incorporation, and (b) that he was not himself understood by his colleagues.
One state legislative committee report, rejected by the legislature as a
whole, found ยง 1 of the Fourteenth Amendment superfluous because it duplicated
the Bill of Rights: the committee obviously did not understand Barron, for Use
of Tiernan v. Mayor and City Council of City of Baltimore, either. That is all
Professor Fairman could find, in hundreds of pages of legislative discussion
prior to passage of the Amendment, that even suggests incorporation.

To this negative evidence the judicial history of the Amendment could be
added. For example, it proved possible for a Court whose members had lived
through Reconstruction to reiterate the doctrine of Barron, for Use of Tiernan
v. Mayor and City Council of City of Baltimore, that the Bill of Rights did
not apply to the State, without so much as questioning whether the Fourteenth
Amendment had any effect on the continued validity of that principle. E.g.,
Walker v. Sauvinet, 92 U.S. 90, 23 L.Ed. 678; see generally Morrison, Does the
Fourteenth Amendment Incorporate the Bill of Rights? The Judicial
Interpretation, 2 Stan.L.Rev. 140 (1949).

10

Davidson v. City of New Orleans, 96 U.S. 97, 104, 24 L.Ed. 616.

11

Holden v. Hardy, 169 U.S. 366, 389, 18 S.Ct. 383, 387, 42 L.Ed. 780.

12

Hurtado v. People of State of California, 110 U.S. 516, 529, 4 S.Ct. 111, 117,
28 L.Ed. 232.

13

State of Missouri v. Lewis, 101 U.S. 22, 31, 25 L.Ed. 989.

14

Gideon v. Wainwright, 372 U.S. 335, 83 S.Ct. 792, 9 L.Ed.2d 799. The right to
counsel was found in the Fourteenth Amendment because, the Court held, it was
essential to a fair trial. See 372 U.S., at 342--345, 83 S.Ct., at 795--797.

15

Klopfer v. State of North Carolina, 386 U.S. 213, 87 S.Ct. 988, 18 L.Ed.2d 1.

16

Pointer v. State of Texas, 380 U.S. 400, 85 S.Ct. 1065, 13 L.Ed.2d 923.

17

Irvin v. Dowd, 366 U.S. 717, 81 S.Ct. 1639, 6 L.Ed.2d 651.

18

The same illogical way of dealing with a Fourteenth Amendment problem was
employed in Malloy v. Hogan, 378 U.S. 1, 84 S.Ct. 1489, 12 L.Ed.2d 653, which
held that the Due Process Clause guaranteed the protection of the Self-
Incrimination Clause of the Fifth Amendment against state action. I disagreed
at that time both with the way the question was framed and with the result the
Court reached. See my dissenting opinion, id., at 14, 84 S.Ct., at 1497. I
consider myself bound by the Court's holding in Malloy with respect to self-
incrimination. See my concurring opinion in Griffin v. State of California,
380 U.S. 609, 615, 85 S.Ct. 1229, 1233, 14 L.Ed.2d 106. I do not think that
Malloy held, nor would I consider myself bound by a holding, that every
question arising under the Due Process Clause shall be settled by an arbitrary
decision whether a clause in the Bill of Rights is 'in' or 'out.'

19

The Court has so held in, e.g., Irvin v. Dowd, 366 U.S. 717, 81 S.Ct. 1639, 6
L.Ed.2d 651. Compare Dennis v. United States, 339 U.S. 162, 70 S.Ct. 519, 94
L.Ed. 734.

20

E.g., Rassmussen v. United States, 197 U.S. 516, 25 S.Ct. 514, 49 L.Ed. 862.

21

E.g., Andres v. United States, 333 U.S. 740, 68 S.Ct. 880, 92 L.Ed. 1055. With
respect to the common-law number and unanimity requirements, the Court
suggests that these present no problem because 'our decisions interpreting the
Sixth Amendment are always subject to reconsideration * * *.' Ante, at 158, n.
30. These examples illustrate a major danger of the 'incorporation' approach--
that provisions of the Bill of Rights may be watered down in the needless
pursuit of uniformity. Cf. my dissenting opinion in Ker v. State of
California, 374 U.S. 23, 44, 83 S.Ct. 1623, 1645, 10 L.Ed.2d 726. MR. JUSTICE
WHITE alluded to this problem in his dissenting opinion in Malloy v. Hogan,
supra, 378 U.S., at 38, 84 S.Ct., at 1509.

22

Criminal Justice Act of 1967, ยง 13.

23

E.g., Callan v. Wilson, 127 U.S. 540, 8 S.Ct. 1301, 32 L.Ed. 223; District of
Columbia v. Clawans, 300 U.S. 617, 57 S.Ct. 660, 81 L.Ed. 843; District of
Columbia v. Colts, 282 U.S. 63, 51 S.Ct. 52, 75 L.Ed. 177.

24

The precise issue is Maxwell was whether a jury of eight rather than 12 jurors
could be employed in criminal prosecutions in Utah. The Court held that this
was permissible because the Fourteenth Amendment did not require the States to
provide trial by jury at all. The Court seems to think this was dictum. As a
technical matter, however, a statement that is critical to the chain of
reasoning by which a result is in fact reached does not become dictum simply
because a later court can imagine a totally different way of deciding the
case. See Jordan v. Commonwealth of Massachusetts, 225 U.S. 167, 176, 32 S.Ct.
651, 652, 56 L.Ed. 1038, citing Maxwell for the proposition that 'the
requirement of due process does not deprive a state of the power to dispense
with jury trial altogether.'

25

E.g., Irvin v. Dowd, supra, 366 U.S. 717, at 721, 81 S.Ct. 1639, at 1641, 6
L.Ed.2d 651; Fay v. People of State of New York, 332 U.S. 261, 288, 67 S.Ct.
1613, 1627, 91 L.Ed. 2043; Palko v. State of Connecticut, supra, 302 U.S., at
325, 58 S.Ct., at 152; Snyder v. Commonwealth of Massachusetts, 291 U.S. 97,
105, 54 S.Ct. 330, 332, 78 L.Ed. 674; Brown v. State of New Jersey, 175 U.S.
172, 175, 20 S.Ct. 77, 78, 44 L.Ed. 119; State of Missouri v. Lewis, supra,
101 U.S., at 31.

26

E.g., Deady, Trial by Jury, 17 Am.L.Rev. 398, 399--400 (1883):

'Still in these days of progress and experiment, when everything is on trial
at the bar of human reason or conceit, it is quite the fashion to speak of
jury trial as something that has outlived its usefulness. Intelligent and
well-meaning people often sneer at it as an awkward and useless impediment to
the speedy and correct administration of justice, and a convenient loop-hole
for the escape of powerful and popular rogues. Considering the kind of jury
trials we sometimes have in the United States, it must be admitted that this
criticism is not without foundation.'

27

See generally Kalven, Memorandum Regarding Jury System, printed in Hearings on
Recording of Jury Deliberations before the Subcommittee to Investigate the
Administration of the Internal Security Act of the Senate Committee on the
Judiciary, 84th Cong., 1st Sess., 63--81\. In particular,

'the debate has been going on for a long time (at least since 1780) and the
arguments which were advanced pro and con haven't changed much in the interim.
Nor, contrary to my first impression, does there seem to be any particular
period in which the debate grows hotter or colder. It has always been a hot
debate.' Id., at 63.

28

See, e.g., Snyder v. Commonwealth of Massachusetts, supra, 291 U.S. 97, at 107
--108, 54 S.Ct. 330, at 333 (Cardozo, J.):

'So far as the Fourteenth Amendment is concerned, the presence of a defendant
(at trial) is a condition of due process to the extent that a fair and just
hearing would be thwarted by his absence, and to that extent only.'

29

The point is made by, among others, A. Tocqueville. 1 Democracy in America 285
(Reeve tr.).

30

The argument is developed by Curtis, The Trial Judge and the Jury, 5
Vand.L.Rev. 150 (1952). For example,

'Juries relieve the judge of the embarrassment of making the necessary
exceptions. They do this, it is true, by violating their oaths, but this, I
think, is better than tempting the judge to violate his oath of office.' Id.,
at 157.

31

See generally G. Williams, The Proof of Guilt 257--263; W. Forsyth, History of
Trial of Jury 261.

32

See J. Stephen, A General View of the Criminal Law of England 208--209.

33

See, e.g., Sunderland, The Inefficiency of the American Jury, 13 Mich.L.Rev.
302, 305:

'But times have changed, and the government itself is now under the absolute
control of the people. The judges, if appointed, are selected by the agents of
the people, and if elected are selected by the people directly. The need for
the jury as a political weapon of defense has been steadily diminishing for a
hundred years, until now the jury must find some other justification for its
continuance.'

34

See, e.g., Sunderland, supra, at 303:

'Life was simple when the jury system was young, but with the steadily growing
complexity of society and social practices, the facts which enter into legal
controversies have become much more complex.'

35

Compare Green, Jury Injustice, 20 Jurid.Rev. 132, 133.

36

Cf. Lummus, Civil Juries and the Law's Delay, 12 B.U.L.Rev. 487.

37

See, e.g., McWhorter, Abolish the Jury, 57 Am.L.Rev. 42. Statistics on this
point are difficult to accumulate for the reason that the only way to measure
jury performance is to compare the result reached by a jury with the result
the judge would have reached in the same case. While judge-jury comparisons
have many values, it is impossible to obtain a statistical comparison of
accuracy in this manner. See generally H. Kalven & H. Zeisel, The American
Jury, passim.

38

E.g., Boston, Some Practical Remedies for Existing Defects in the
Administration of Justice, 61 U.Pa.L.Rev. 1, 16:

'There is not one important personal or property interest, outside of a Court
of justice, which any of us would willingly commit to the first twelve men
that come along the street * * *.'

39

E.g., McWhorter, supra, at 46:

'It is the jury system that consumes time at the public expense in gallery
playing and sensational and theatrical exhibitions before the jury, whereby
the public interest and the dignity of the law are swallowed up in a morbid,
partisan or emotional personal interest in the parties immediately concerned.'

40

Williams, supra, at 302.

41

For example, in the federal courts the right of the defendant to waive a jury
was in doubt as recently as 1930, when it was established in Patton v. United
States, 281 U.S. 276, 50 S.Ct. 253, 74 L.Ed. 854. It was settled in New York
only in 1957, People v. Carroll, 7 Misc.2d 581, 161 N.Y.S.2d 339, aff'd, 3
N.Y.2d 686, 171 N.Y.S.2d 812, 148 N.E.2d 875.

42

Kalven & Zeisel, supra, at 12--32.

43

See Oppenheim, Waiver of Trial by Jury in Criminal Cases, 25 Mich.L.Rev. 695,
728.

44

37 Hen. 8, c. 7.

45

Frankfurter and Corcoran, Petty Federal Offenses and the Constitutional
Guaranty of Trial by Jury, 39 Harv.L.Rev. 917, 928. The source of the authors'
information is R. Burn, Justice of the Peace (1776).

46

Frankfurter & Corcoran, supra, at 930--934.

47

See, id., at 938--942.

48

Ibid.

49

Frankfurter & Corcoran, supra, at 945. They refer to the Vagrancy Act of 1721,
2 Col.L.(N.Y.) 56.

50

Frankfurter & Corcoran, supra, at 945.

51

The example is taken from Day, Petty Magistrates' Courts in Connecticut, 17
J.Crim.L.C. & P.S., 343, 346--347, cited in Kalven & Zeisel, supra, at 17. The
point is that the 'huge proportion' of criminal charges for which jury trial
has not been available in America, E. Puttkammer, Administration of Criminal
Law 87--88, is increased by the judicious action of weary prosecutors.

