\newpageSaenz  v. Roe526 U.S. 473 (1999)**Justice Stevens delivered the opinion of the Court.**

In 1992, California enacted a statute limiting the maximum welfare benefitsavailable to newly arrived residents. The scheme limits the amount payable toa family that has resided in the State for less than 12 months to the amountpayable by the State of the family's prior residence. The questions presentedby this case are whether the 1992 statute was constitutional when it wasenacted and, if not, whether an amendment to the Social Security Act enactedby Congress in 1996 affects that determination.

* California is not only one of the largest, most populated, and most beautiful States in the Nation; it is also one of the most generous. Like all other States, California has participated in several welfare programs authorized by the Social Security Act and partially funded by the Federal Government. Its programs, however, provide a higher level of benefits and serve more needy citizens than those of most other States. In one year the most expensive of those programs, Aid to Families with Dependent Children (AFDC), which was replaced in 1996 with Temporary Assistance to Needy Families (TANF), provided benefits for an average of 2,645,814 persons per month at an annual cost to the State of $2.9 billion. In California the cash benefit for a family of two a mother and one child is $456 a month, but in the neighboring State of Arizona, for example, it is only $275.

In 1992, in order to make a relatively modest reduction in its vast welfarebudget, the California Legislature enacted §11450.03 of the state Welfare andInstitutions Code. That section sought to change the California AFDC programby limiting new residents, for the first year they live in California, to thebenefits they would have received in the State of their prior residence.1Because in 1992 a state program either had to conform to federalspecifications or receive a waiver from the Secretary of Health and HumanServices in order to qualify for federal reimbursement, §11450.03 requiredapproval by the Secretary to take effect. In October 1992, the Secretaryissued a waiver purporting to grant such approval.

On December 21, 1992, three California residents who were eligible for AFDCbenefits filed an action in the Eastern District of California challenging theconstitutionality of the durational residency requirement in §11450.03. Eachplaintiff alleged that she had recently moved to California to live withrelatives in order to escape abusive family circumstances. One returned toCalifornia after living in Louisiana for seven years, the second had beenliving in Oklahoma for six weeks and the third came from Colorado. Eachalleged that her monthly AFDC grant for the ensuing 12 months would besubstantially lower under §11450.03 than if the statute were not in effect.Thus, the former residents of Louisiana and Oklahoma would receive $190 and$341 respectively for a family of three even though the full California grantwas $641; the former resident of Colorado, who had just one child, was limitedto $280 a month as opposed to the full California grant of $504 for a familyof two.

The District Court issued a temporary restraining order and, after a hearing,preliminarily enjoined implementation of the statute. District Judge Levifound that the statute "produces substantial disparities in benefit levels andmakes no accommodation for the different costs of living that exist indifferent states."2 Relying primarily on our decisions in Shapiro v. Thompson,394 U.S. 618 (1969), and Zobel v. Williams, 457 U.S. 55 (1982), he concludedthat the statute placed "a penalty on the decision of new residents to migrateto the State and be treated on an equal basis with existing residents." Greenv. Anderson, 811 F. Supp. 516, 521 (ED Cal. 1993). In his view, if the purposeof the measure was to deter migration by poor people into the State, it wouldbe unconstitutional for that reason. And even if the purpose was only toconserve limited funds, the State had failed to explain why the entire burdenof the saving should be imposed on new residents. The Court of Appealssummarily affirmed for the reasons stated by the District Judge. Green v.Anderson, 26 F.3d 95 (CA9 1994).

We granted the State's petition for certiorari. 513 U.S. 922 (1994). We were,however, unable to reach the merits because the Secretary's approval of§11450.03 had been invalidated in a separate proceeding,3 and the State hadacknowledged that the Act would not be implemented without further action bythe Secretary. We vacated the judgment and directed that the case bedismissed. Anderson v. Green, 513 U.S. 557 (1995) (per curiam).4 Accordingly,§11450.03 remained inoperative until after Congress enacted the PersonalResponsibility and Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act of 1996 PRWORA, 110Stat. 2105.

PRWORA replaced the AFDC program with TANF. The new statute expresslyauthorizes any State that receives a block grant under TANF to "apply to afamily the rules (including benefit amounts) of the [TANF] program of anotherState if the family has moved to the State from the other State and hasresided in the State for less than 12 months." 42 U.S.C. § 604(c) (1994 ed.,Supp. II). With this federal statutory provision in effect, California nolonger needed specific approval from the Secretary to implement §11450.03. TheCalifornia Department of Social Services therefore issued an "All CountyLetter" announcing that the enforcement of §11450.03 would commence on April1, 1997.

The All County Letter clarifies certain aspects of the statute. Even ifmembers of an eligible family had lived in California all of their lives, butleft the State "on January 29th, intending to reside in another state, andreturned on April 15th," their benefits are determined by the law of theirState of residence from January 29 to April 15, assuming that that level waslower than California's.5 Moreover, the lower level of benefits appliesregardless of whether the family was on welfare in the State of priorresidence and regardless of the family's motive for moving to California. Theinstructions also explain that the residency requirement is inapplicable tofamilies that recently arrived from another country.II

On April 1, 1997, the two respondents filed this action in the EasternDistrict of California making essentially the same claims asserted by theplaintiffs in Anderson v. Green,6 but also challenging the constitutionalityof PRWORA's approval of the durational residency requirement. As in Green, theDistrict Court issued a temporary restraining order and certified the case asa class action.7 The Court also advised the Attorney General of the UnitedStates that the constitutionality of a federal statute had been drawn intoquestion, but she did not seek to intervene or to file an amicus brief.Reasoning that PRWORA permitted, but did not require, States to imposedurational residency requirements, Judge Levi concluded that the existence ofthe federal statute did not affect the legal analysis in his prior opinion inGreen.

He did, however, make certain additional comments on the parties' factualcontentions. He noted that the State did not challenge plaintiffs' evidenceindicating that, although California benefit levels were the sixth highest inthe Nation in absolute terms,8 when housing costs are factored in, they rank18th; that new residents coming from 43 States would face higher costs ofliving in California; and that welfare benefit levels actually have little, ifany, impact on the residential choices made by poor people. On the other hand,he noted that the availability of other programs such as homeless assistanceand an additional food stamp allowance of $1 in stamps for every $3 in reducedwelfare benefits partially offset the disparity between the benefits for newand old residents. Notwithstanding those ameliorating facts, the State did notdisagree with plaintiffs' contention that §11450.03 would create significantdisparities between newcomers and welfare recipients who have resided in theState for over one year.

The State relied squarely on the undisputed fact that the statute would savesome $10.9 million in annual welfare costs an amount that is surelysignificant even though only a relatively small part of its annualexpenditures of approximately $2.9 billion for the entire program. Itcontended that this cost saving was an appropriate exercise of budgetaryauthority as long as the residency requirement did not penalize the right totravel. The State reasoned that the payment of the same benefits that wouldhave been received in the State of prior residency eliminated any potentiallypunitive aspects of the measure. Judge Levi concluded, however, that therelevant comparison was not between new residents of California and theresidents of their former States, but rather between the new residents andlonger term residents of California. He therefore again enjoined theimplementation of the statute.

Without finally deciding the merits, the Court of Appeals affirmed hisissuance of a preliminary injunction. Roe v. Anderson, 134 F.3d 1400 (CA91998). It agreed with the District Court's view that the passage of PRWORA didnot affect the constitutional analysis, that respondents had established aprobability of success on the merits and that class members might sufferirreparable harm if §11450.03 became operative. Although the decision of theCourt of Appeals is consistent with the views of other federal courts thathave addressed the issue,9 we granted certiorari because of the importance ofthe case. 524 U.S. ___ (1998).10 We now affirm.III

The word "travel" is not found in the text of the Constitution. Yet the"constitutional right to travel from one State to another" is firmly embeddedin our jurisprudence. United States v. Guest, 383 U.S. 745, 757 (1966).Indeed, as Justice Stewart reminded us in Shapiro v. Thompson, 394 U.S. 618(1969), the right is so important that it is "assertable against privateinterference as well as governmental action a virtually unconditional personalright, guaranteed by the Constitution to us all." Id., at 643 (concurringopinion).

In Shapiro, we reviewed the constitutionality of three statutory provisionsthat denied welfare assistance to residents of Connecticut, the District ofColumbia, and Pennsylvania, who had resided within those respectivejurisdictions less than one year immediately preceding their applications forassistance. Without pausing to identify the specific source of the right, webegan by noting that the Court had long "recognized that the nature of ourFederal Union and our constitutional concepts of personal liberty unite torequire that all citizens be free to travel throughout the length and breadthof our land uninhibited by statutes, rules, or regulations which unreasonablyburden or restrict this movement." Id., at 629. We squarely held that it was"constitutionally impermissible" for a State to enact durational residencyrequirements for the purpose of inhibiting the migration by needy persons intothe State.11 We further held that a classification that had the effect ofimposing a penalty on the exercise of the right to travel violated the EqualProtection Clause "unless shown to be necessary to promote a compellinggovernmental interest," id., at 634, and that no such showing had been made.

In this case California argues that §11450.03 was not enacted for theimpermissible purpose of inhibiting migration by needy persons and that,unlike the legislation reviewed in Shapiro, it does not penalize the right totravel because new arrivals are not ineligible for benefits during their firstyear of residence. California submits that, instead of being subjected to thestrictest scrutiny, the statute should be upheld if it is supported by arational basis and that the State's legitimate interest in saving over $10million a year satisfies that test. Although the United States did not electto participate in the proceedings in the District Court or the Court ofAppeals, it has participated as amicus curiae in this Court. It has advancedthe novel argument that the enactment of PRWORA allows the States to adopt a"specialized choice-of-law-type provision" that "should be subject to anintermediate level of constitutional review," merely requiring that durationalresidency requirements be "substantially related to an important governmentalobjective."12 The debate about the appropriate standard of review, togetherwith the potential relevance of the federal statute, persuades us that it willbe useful to focus on the source of the constitutional right on whichrespondents rely.IV

The "right to travel" discussed in our cases embraces at least three differentcomponents. It protects the right of a citizen of one State to enter and toleave another State, the right to be treated as a welcome visitor rather thanan unfriendly alien when temporarily present in the second State, and, forthose travelers who elect to become permanent residents, the right to betreated like other citizens of that State.

It was the right to go from one place to another, including the right to crossstate borders while en route, that was vindicated in Edwards v. California,314 U.S. 160 (1941), which invalidated a state law that impeded the freeinterstate passage of the indigent. We reaffirmed that right in United Statesv. Guest, 383 U.S. 745 (1966), which afforded protection to the " 'right totravel freely to and from the State of Georgia and to use highway facilitiesand other instrumentalities of interstate commerce within the State ofGeorgia.' " Id., at 757. Given that §11450.03 imposed no obstacle torespondents' entry into California, we think the State is correct when itargues that the statute does not directly impair the exercise of the right tofree interstate movement. For the purposes of this case, therefore, we neednot identify the source of that particular right in the text of theConstitution. The right of "free ingress and regress to and from" neighboringStates, which was expressly mentioned in the text of the Articles ofConfederation,13 may simply have been "conceived from the beginning to be anecessary concomitant of the stronger Union the Constitution created." Id., at758.

The second component of the right to travel is, however, expressly protectedby the text of the Constitution. The first sentence of Article IV, §2,provides:

"The Citizens of each State shall be entitled to all Privileges and Immunitiesof Citizens in the several States."

Thus, by virtue of a person's state citizenship, a citizen of one State whotravels in other States, intending to return home at the end of his journey,is entitled to enjoy the "Privileges and Immunities of Citizens in the severalStates" that he visits.14 This provision removes "from the citizens of eachState the disabilities of alienage in the other States." Paul v. Virginia, 8Wall. 168, 180 (1869) ("[W]ithout some provision . . . removing from citizensof each State the disabilities of alienage in the other States, and givingthem equality of privilege with citizens of those States, the Republic wouldhave constituted little more than a league of States; it would not haveconstituted the Union which now exists"). It provides important protectionsfor nonresidents who enter a State whether to obtain employment, Hicklin v.Orbeck, 437 U.S. 518 (1978), to procure medical services, Doe v. Bolton, 410U.S. 179, 200 (1973), or even to engage in commercial shrimp fishing, Toomerv. Witsell, 334 U.S. 385 (1948). Those protections are not "absolute," but theClause "does bar discrimination against citizens of other States where thereis no substantial reason for the discrimination beyond the mere fact that theyare citizens of other States." Id., at 396. There may be a substantial reasonfor requiring the nonresident to pay more than the resident for a huntinglicense, see Baldwin v. Fish and Game Comm'n of Mont., 436 U.S. 371, 390 391(1978), or to enroll in the state university, see Vlandis v. Kline, 412 U.S.441, 445 (1973), but our cases have not identified any acceptable reason forqualifying the protection afforded by the Clause for "the 'citizen of State Awho ventures into State B' to settle there and establish a home." Zobel, 457U.S., at 74 (O'Connor, J., concurring in judgment). Permissible justificationsfor discrimination between residents and nonresidents are simply inapplicableto a nonresident's exercise of the right to move into another State and becomea resident of that State.

What is at issue in this case, then, is this third aspect of the right totravel the right of the newly arrived citizen to the same privileges andimmunities enjoyed by other citizens of the same State. That right isprotected not only by the new arrival's status as a state citizen, but also byher status as a citizen of the United States.15 That additional source ofprotection is plainly identified in the opening words of the FourteenthAmendment:

"All persons born or naturalized in the United States, and subject to thejurisdiction thereof, are citizens of the United States and of the Statewherein they reside. No State shall make or enforce any law which shallabridge the privileges or immunities of citizens of the United States; ."16

Despite fundamentally differing views concerning the coverage of thePrivileges or Immunities Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment, most notablyexpressed in the majority and dissenting opinions in the Slaughter-HouseCases, 16 Wall. 36 (1873), it has always been common ground that this Clauseprotects the third component of the right to travel. Writing for the majorityin the Slaughter-House Cases, Justice Miller explained that one of theprivileges conferred by this Clause "is that a citizen of the United Statescan, of his own volition, become a citizen of any State of the Union by a bon; fide residence therein, with the same rights as other citizens of thatState." Id., at 80. Justice Bradley, in dissent, used even stronger languageto make the same point:

"The states have not now, if they ever had, any power to restrict theircitizenship to any classes or persons. A citizen of the United States has aperfect constitutional right to go to and reside in any State he chooses, andto claim citizenship therein, and an equality of rights with every othercitizen; and the whole power of the nation is pledged to sustain him in thatright. He is not bound to cringe to any superior, or to pray for any act ofgrace, as a means of enjoying all the rights and privileges enjoyed by othercitizens." Id., at 112 113.

That newly arrived citizens "have two political capacities, one state and onefederal," adds special force to their claim that they have the same rights asothers who share their citizenship.17 Neither mere rationality nor someintermediate standard of review should be used to judge the constitutionalityof a state rule that discriminates against some of its citizens because theyhave been domiciled in the State for less than a year. The appropriatestandard may be more categorical than that articulated in Shapiro, see supra,at 8 9, but it is surely no less strict.V

Because this case involves discrimination against citizens who have completedtheir interstate travel, the State's argument that its welfare scheme affectsthe right to travel only "incidentally" is beside the point. Were we concernedsolely with actual deterrence to migration, we might be persuaded that apartial withholding of benefits constitutes a lesser incursion on the right totravel than an outright denial of all benefits. See Dunn v. Blumstein, 405U.S. 330, 339 (1972). But since the right to travel embraces the citizen'sright to be treated equally in her new State of residence, the discriminatoryclassification is itself a penalty.

It is undisputed that respondents and the members of the class that theyrepresent are citizens of California and that their need for welfare benefitsis unrelated to the length of time that they have resided in California. Wethus have no occasion to consider what weight might be given to a citizen'slength of residence if the bona fides of her claim to state citizenship werequestioned. Moreover, because whatever benefits they receive will be consumedwhile they remain in California, there is no danger that recognition of theirclaim will encourage citizens of other States to establish residency for justlong enough to acquire some readily portable benefit, such as a divorce or acollege education, that will be enjoyed after they return to their originaldomicile. See, e.g., Sosna v. Iowa, 419 U.S. 393 (1975); Vlandis v. Kline, 412U.S. 441 (1973).

The classifications challenged in this case and there are many are definedentirely by (a) the period of residency in California and (b) the location ofthe prior residences of the disfavored class members. The favored class ofbeneficiaries includes all eligible California citizens who have resided therefor at least one year, plus those new arrivals who last resided in anothercountry or in a State that provides benefits at least as generous asCalifornia's. Thus, within the broad category of citizens who resided inCalifornia for less than a year, there are many who are treated like lifetimeresidents. And within the broad sub-category of new arrivals who are treatedless favorably, there are many smaller classes whose benefit levels aredetermined by the law of the States from whence they came. To justify§11450.03, California must therefore explain not only why it is sound fiscalpolicy to discriminate against those who have been citizens for less than ayear, but also why it is permissible to apply such a variety of rules withinthat class.

These classifications may not be justified by a purpose to deter welfareapplicants from migrating to California for three reasons. First, although itis reasonable to assume that some persons may be motivated to move for thepurpose of obtaining higher benefits, the empirical evidence reviewed by theDistrict Judge, which takes into account the high cost of living inCalifornia, indicates that the number of such persons is quite small surelynot large enough to justify a burden on those who had no such motive.18Second, California has represented to the Court that the legislation was notenacted for any such reason.19 Third, even if it were, as we squarely held inShapiro v. Thompson, 394 U.S. 618 (1969), such a purpose would beunequivocally impermissible.

Disavowing any desire to fence out the indigent, California has insteadadvanced an entirely fiscal justification for its multitiered scheme. Theenforcement of §11450.03 will save the State approximately $10.9 million ayear. The question is not whether such saving is a legitimate purpose butwhether the State may accomplish that end by the discriminatory means it haschosen. An evenhanded, across-the-board reduction of about 72 cents per monthfor every beneficiary would produce the same result. But our negative answerto the question does not rest on the weakness of the State's purported fiscaljustification. It rests on the fact that the Citizenship Clause of theFourteenth Amendment expressly equates citizenship with residence: "ThatClause does not provide for, and does not allow for, degrees of citizenshipbased on length of residence." Zobel, 457 U.S., at 69. It is equally clearthat the Clause does not tolerate a hierarchy of 45 subclasses of similarlysituated citizens based on the location of their prior residence.20 Thus§11450.03 is doubly vulnerable: Neither the duration of respondents'California residence, nor the identity of their prior States of residence, hasany relevance to their need for benefits. Nor do those factors bear anyrelationship to the State's interest in making an equitable allocation of thefunds to be distributed among its needy citizens. As in Shapiro, we reject anycontributory rationale for the denial of benefits to new residents:

"But we need not rest on the particular facts of these cases. Appellants'reasoning would logically permit the State to bar new residents from schools,parks, and libraries or deprive them of police and fire protection. Indeed itwould permit the State to apportion all benefits and services according to thepast tax contributions of its citizens." 394 U.S., at 632 633.

See also Zobel, 457 U.S., at 64. In short, the State's legitimate interest insaving money provides no justification for its decision to discriminate amongequally eligible citizens.VI

The question that remains is whether congressional approval of durationalresidency requirements in the 1996 amendment to the Social Security Actsomehow resuscitates the constitutionality of §11450.03. That question isreadily answered, for we have consistently held that Congress may notauthorize the States to violate the Fourteenth Amendment.21 Moreover, theprotection afforded to the citizen by the Citizenship Clause of that Amendmentis a limitation on the powers of the National Government as well as theStates.

Article I of the Constitution grants Congress broad power to legislate incertain areas. Those legislative powers are, however, limited not only by thescope of the Framers' affirmative delegation, but also by the principle "thatthey may not be exercised in a way that violates other specific provisions ofthe Constitution. For example, Congress is granted broad power to 'lay andcollect Taxes,' but the taxing power, broad as it is, may not be invoked insuch a way as to violate the privilege against self-incrimination." Williamsv. Rhodes, 393 U.S. 23, 29 (1968) (footnote omitted). Congress has noaffirmative power to authorize the States to violate the Fourteenth Amendmentand is implicitly prohibited from passing legislation that purports tovalidate any such violation.

"Section 5 of the Fourteenth Amendment gives Congress broad power indeed toenforce the command of the amendment and 'to secure to all persons theenjoyment of perfect equality of civil rights and the equal protection of thelaws against State denial or invasion .' Ex parte Virginia, 100 U.S. 339, 346(1880). Congress' power under §5, however, 'is limited to adopting measures toenforce the guarantees of the Amendment; §5 grants Congress no power torestrict, abrogate, or dilute these guarantees.' Katzenbach v. Morgan, 384U.S. 641, 651, n. 10 (1966). Although we give deference to congressionaldecisions and classifications, neither Congress nor a State can validate a lawthat denies the rights guaranteed by the Fourteenth Amendment. See, e.g.,Califano v. Goldfarb, 430 U.S. 199, 210 (1977); Williams v. Rhodes, 393 U.S.23, 29 (1968)." Mississippi Univ. for Women v. Hogan, 458 U.S. 718, 732 733(1982).

The Solicitor General does not unequivocally defend the constitutionality of§11450.03. But he has argued that two features of PRWORA may provide asufficient justification for state durational requirements to warrant furtherinquiry before finally passing on the section's validity, or perhaps that itis only invalid insofar as it applies to new arrivals who were not on welfarebefore they arrived in California.22

He first points out that because the TANF program gives the States broaderdiscretion than did AFDC, there will be significant differences among theStates which may provide new incentives for welfare recipients to change theirresidences. He does not, however, persuade us that the disparities under thenew program will necessarily be any greater than the differences under AFDC,which included such examples as the disparity between California's monthlybenefit of $673 for a family of four with Mississippi's benefit of $144 for acomparable family. Moreover, we are not convinced that a policy of eliminatingincentives to move to California provides a more permissible justification forclassifying California citizens than a policy of imposing special burdens onnew arrivals to deter them from moving into the State. Nor is thediscriminatory impact of §11450.03 abated by repeatedly characterizing it as"a sort of specialized choice-of-law rule."23 California law alonediscriminates among its own citizens on the basis of their prior residence.

The Solicitor General also suggests that we should recognize the congressionalconcern addressed in the legislative history of PRWORA that the "States mightengage in a 'race to the bottom' in setting the benefit levels in their TANFprograms."24 Again, it is difficult to see why that concern should be anygreater under TANF than under AFDC. The evidence reviewed by the DistrictCourt indicates that the savings resulting from the discriminatory policy, ifspread equitably throughout the entire program, would have only a minisculeimpact on benefit levels. Indeed, as one of the legislators apparentlyinterpreted this concern, it would logically prompt the States to reducebenefit levels sufficiently "to encourage emigration of benefit recipients."25But speculation about such an unlikely eventuality provides no basis forupholding §11450.03.

Finally, the Solicitor General suggests that the State's discrimination mightbe acceptable if California had limited the disfavored subcategories of newcitizens to those who had received aid in their prior State of residence atany time within the year before their arrival in California. The suggestion isironic for at least three reasons: It would impose the most severe burdens onthe neediest members of the disfavored classes; it would significantly reducethe savings that the State would obtain, thus making the State's claimedjustification even less tenable; and, it would confine the effect of thestatute to what the Solicitor General correctly characterizes as "theinvidious purpose of discouraging poor people generally from settling in theState."26

* * *

Citizens of the United States, whether rich or poor, have the right to chooseto be citizens "of the State wherein they reside." U.S. Const., Amdt. 14, §1\.The States, however, do not have any right to select their citizens.27 TheFourteenth Amendment, like the Constitution itself, was, as Justice Cardozoput it, "framed upon the theory that the peoples of the several states mustsink or swim together, and that in the long run prosperity and salvation arein union and not division." Baldwin v. G. A. F. Seelig, Inc., 294 U.S. 511,523 (1935).

The judgment of the Court of Appeals is affirmed.

**Chief Justice Rehnquist, with whom Justice Thomas joins, dissenting.**

The Court today breathes new life into the previously dormant Privileges orImmunities Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment a Clause relied upon by thisCourt in only one other decision, Colgate v. Harvey, 296 U.S. 404 (1935),overruled five years later by Madden v. Kentucky, 309 U.S. 83 (1940). It usesthis Clause to strike down what I believe is a reasonable measure fallingunder the head of a "good-faith residency requirement." Because I do not thinkany provision of the Constitution and surely not a provision relied upon foronly the second time since its enactment 130 years ago requires this result, Idissent.

Much of the Court's opinion is unremarkable and sound. The right to travel clearly embraces the right to go from one place to another, and prohibits States from impeding the free interstate passage of citizens. The state law in Edwards v. California, 314 U.S. 160 (1941), which prohibited the transport of any indigent person into Califor-

nia, was a classic barrier to travel or migration and the Court rightly struckit down. Indeed, for most of this country's history, what the Court todaycalls the first "component" of the right to travel, ante, at 10, was theentirety of this right. As Chief Justice Taney stated in his dissent in thePassenger Cases, 7 How. 283 (1849):

"We are all citizens of the United States; and, as members of the samecommunity, must have the right to pass and repass through every part of itwithout interruption, as freely as in our own States. And a tax imposed by aState for entering its territories or harbours is inconsistent with the rightswhich belong to the citizens of other States as members of the Union, and withthe objects which that Union was intended to attain. Such a power in theStates could produce nothing but discord and mutual irritation, and they veryclearly do not possess it." Id., at 492.

See also Crandall v. Nevada, 6 Wall. 35, 44 (1868); Williams v. Fears, 179U.S. 270, 274 (1900); Memorial Hospital v. Maricopa County, 415 U.S. 250, 280283 (1974) (Rehnquist, J., dissenting) (collecting and discussing cases). TheCourt wisely holds that because Cal. Welf. & Inst. Code Ann. §11450.03 (WestSupp. 1999) imposes no obstacle to respondents' entry into California, thestatute does not infringe upon the right to travel. See ante, at 10. Thus, thetraditional conception of the right to travel is simply not an issue in thiscase.

I also have no difficulty with aligning the right to travel with theprotections afforded by the Privileges and Immunities Clause of Article IV,§2, to nonresidents who enter other States "intending to return home at theend of [their] journey." See ante, at 11. Nonresident visitors of other Statesshould not be subject to discrimination solely because they live out of State.See Paul v. Virginia, 8 Wall. 168 (1869); Hicklin v. Orbeck, 437 U.S. 518(1978). Like the traditional right-to-travel guarantees discussed above,however, this Clause has no application here, because respondents expressed adesire to stay in California and become citizens of that State. Respondentstherefore plainly fall outside the protections of Article IV, §2.

Finally, I agree with the proposition that a "citizen of the United Statescan, of his own volition, become a citizen of any State of the Union by a bon; fide residence therein, with the same rights as other citizens of thatState." Slaughter-House Cases, 16 Wall. 36, 80 (1873).

But I cannot see how the right to become a citizen of another State is anecessary "component" of the right to travel, or why the Court tries to marrythese separate and distinct rights. A person is no longer "traveling" in anysense of the word when he finishes his journey to a State which he plans tomake his home. Indeed, under the Court's logic, the protections of thePrivileges or Immunities Clause recognized in this case come into play onlywhen an individual stops traveling with the intent to remain and become acitizen of a new State. The right to travel and the right to become a citizenare distinct, their relationship is not reciprocal, and one is not a"component" of the other. Indeed, the same dicta from the Slaughter-HouseCases quoted by the Court actually treats the right to become a citizen andthe right to travel as separate and distinct rights under the Privileges orImmunities Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment. See id., at 79 80.1 At most,restrictions on an individual's right to become a citizen indirectly affecthis calculus in deciding whether to exercise his right to travel in the firstplace, but such an attenuated and uncertain relationship is no ground forfolding one right into the other.

No doubt the Court has, in the past 30 years, essentially conflated the rightto travel with the right to equal state citizenship in striking downdurational residence requirements similar to the one challenged here. See,e.g., Shapiro v. Thompson, 394 U.S. 618 (1969) (striking down 1-year residencebefore receiving any welfare benefit); Dunn v. Blumstein, 405 U.S. 330 (1972)(striking down 1-year residence before receiving the right to vote in stateelections); Maricopa County, 415 U.S., at 280 283 (striking down 1-year countyresidence before receiving entitlement to nonemergency hospitalization oremergency care). These cases marked a sharp departure from the Court's priorright-to-travel cases because in none of them was travel itself prohibited.See id., at 254 255 ("Whatever its ultimate scope . . . the right to travelwas involved in only a limited sense in Shapiro"); Shapiro, supra, at 671 672(Harlan, J., dissenting).

Instead, the Court in these cases held that restricting the provision ofwelfare benefits, votes, or certain medical benefits to new citizens for alimited time impermissibly "penalized" them under the Equal Protection Clauseof the Fourteenth Amendment for having exercised their right to travel. SeeMaricopa County, supra, at 257. The Court thus settled for deciding whatrestrictions amounted to "deprivations of very important benefits and rights"that operated to indirectly "penalize" the right to travel. See AttorneyGeneral of N. Y. v. Soto-Lopez, 476 U.S. 898, 907 (1986) (plurality opinion).In other cases, the Court recognized that laws dividing new and old residentshad little to do with the right to travel and merely triggered an inquiry intowhether the resulting classification rationally furthered a legitimategovernment purpose. See Zobel v. Williams, 457 U.S. 55, 60, n. 6 (1982);Hooper v. Bernalillo County Assessor, 472 U.S. 612, 618 (1985).2 While Zobeland Hooper reached the wrong result in my view, they at least put the Court onthe proper track in identifying exactly what interests it was protecting;namely, the right of individuals not to be subject to unjustifiableclassifications as opposed to infringements on the right to travel.

The Court today tries to clear much of the underbrush created by these priorright-to-travel cases, abandoning its effort to define what residencerequirements deprive individuals of "important rights and benefits" or"penalize" the right to travel. See ante, at 14 15. Under its new analyticalframework, a State, outside certain ill-defined circumstances, cannot classifyits citizens by the length of their residence in the State without offendingthe Privileges or Immunities Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment. The Courtthus departs from Shapiro and its progeny, and, while paying lipservice to theright to travel, the Court does little to explain how the right to travel isinvolved at all. Instead, as the Court's analysis clearly demonstrates, seeante, at 15 17, this case is only about respondents' right to immediatelyenjoy all the privileges of being a California citizen in relation to thatState's ability to test the good-faith assertion of this right. The Court hasthus come full circle by effectively disavowing the analysis of Shapiro,segregating the right to travel and the rights secured by Article IV from theright to become a citizen under the Privileges or Immunities Clause, and thentesting the residence requirement here against this latter right. For all itsmisplaced efforts to fold the right to become a citizen into the right totravel, the Court has essentially returned to its original understanding ofthe right to travel.II

In unearthing from its tomb the right to become a state citizen and to betreated equally in the new State of residence, however, the Court ignores aState's need to assure that only persons who establish a bona fide residencereceive the benefits provided to current residents of the State. TheSlaughter-House dicta at the core of the Court's analysis specificallyconditions a United States citizen's right to "become a citizen of any stateof the Union" and to enjoy the "same rights as other citizens of that State"on the establishment of a "bona fide residence therein." 16 Wall., at 80(emphasis added). Even when redefining the right to travel in Shapiro and itsprogeny, the Court has "always carefully distinguished between bona fideresidence requirements, which seek to differentiate between residents andnonresidents, and residence requirements, such as durational, fixed date, andfixed point residence requirements, which treat established residentsdifferently based on the time they migrated into the State." Soto-Lopez,supra, at 903, n. 3 (citing cases).

Thus, the Court has consistently recognized that while new citizens must havethe same opportunity to enjoy the privileges of being a citizen of a State,the States retain the ability to use bona fide residence requirements toferret out those who intend to take the privileges and run. As this Courtexplained in Martinez v. Bynum, 461 U.S. 321, 328 329 (1983): "A bona fideresidence requirement, appropriately defined and uniformly applied, furthersthe substantial state interest in assuring that services provided for itsresidents are enjoyed only by residents. . . . A bona fide residencerequirement simply requires that the person does establish residence beforedemanding the services that are restricted to residents." The Martinez Courtexplained that "residence" requires "both physical presence and an intentionto remain," see id., at 330, and approved a Texas law that restrictedeligibility for tuition-free education to families who met this minimumdefinition of residence, id., at 332 333.

While the physical presence element of a bona fide residence is easy topolice, the subjective intent element is not. It is simply unworkable andfutile to require States to inquire into each new resident's subjective intentto remain. Hence, States employ objective criteria such as durationalresidence requirements to test a new resident's resolve to remain before thesenew citizens can enjoy certain in-state benefits. Recognizing the practicalappeal of such criteria, this Court has repeatedly sanctioned the State's useof durational residence requirements before new residents receive in-statetuition rates at state universities. Starns v. Malkerson, 401 U.S. 985 (1971),summarily aff'g 326 F. Supp. 234 (Minn. 1970) (upholding 1-year residencerequirement for in-state tuition); Sturgis v. Washington, 414 U.S. 1057,summarily aff'g 368 F. Supp. 38 (WD Wash. 1973) (same). The Court hasdeclared: "The State can establish such reasonable criteria for in-statestatus as to make virtually certain that students who are not, in fact, bonafide residents of the State, but have come there solely for educationalpurposes, cannot take advantage of the in-state rates." See Vlandis v. Kline,412 U.S. 441, 453 454 (1973). The Court has done the same in upholding a1-year residence requirement for eligibility to obtain a divorce in statecourts, see Sosna v. Iowa, 419 U.S. 393, 406 409 (1975), and in upholdingpolitical party registration restrictions that amounted to a durationalresidency requirement for voting in primary elections, see Rosario v.Rockefeller, 410 U.S. 752, 760 762 (1973).

If States can require individuals to reside in-state for a year beforeexercising the right to educational benefits, the right to terminate amarriage, or the right to vote in primary elections that all other statecitizens enjoy, then States may surely do the same for welfare benefits.Indeed, there is no material difference between a 1-year residence requirementapplied to the level of welfare benefits given out by a State, and the samerequirement applied to the level of tuition subsidies at a state university.The welfare payment here and in-state tuition rates are cash subsidiesprovided to a limited class of people, and California's standard of living andhigher education system make both subsidies quite attractive. Durationalresidence requirements were upheld when used to regulate the provision ofhigher education subsidies, and the same deference should be given in the caseof welfare payments. See Dandridge v. Williams, 397 U.S. 471, 487 (1970)("[T]he Constitution does not empower this Court to second-guess stateofficials charged with the difficult responsibility of allocating limitedpublic welfare funds among the myriad of potential recipients.").

The Court today recognizes that States retain the ability to determine thebona fides of an individual's claim to residence, see ante, at 15, but thentries to avoid the issue. It asserts that because respondents' need forwelfare benefits is unrelated to the length of time they have resided inCalifornia, it has "no occasion to consider what weight might be given to acitizen's length of residence if the bona fides of her claim to statecitizenship were questioned." See ibid. But I do not understand how theabsence of a link between need and length of residency bears on the State'sability to objectively test respondents' resolve to stay in California. Thereis no link between the need for an education or for a divorce and the lengthof residence, and yet States may use length of residence as an objectiveyardstick to channel their benefits to those whose intent to stay islegitimate.

In one respect, the State has a greater need to require a durational residencefor welfare benefits than for college eligibility. The impact of a largenumber of new residents who immediately seek welfare payments will have a fargreater impact on a State's operating budget than the impact of new residentsseeking to attend a state university. In the case of the welfare recipients, amodest durational residence requirement to allow for the completion of anannual legislative budget cycle gives the State time to decide how to financethe increased obligations.

The Court tries to distinguish education and divorce benefits by contendingthat the welfare payment here will be consumed in California, while a collegeeducation or a divorce produces benefits that are "portable" and can beenjoyed after individuals return to their original domicile. Ibid. But this"you can't take it with you" distinction is more apparent than real, andoffers little guidance to lower courts who must apply this rationale in thefuture. Welfare payments are a form of insurance, giving impoverishedindividuals and their families the means to meet the demands of daily lifewhile they receive the necessary training, education, and time to look for ajob. The cash itself will no doubt be spent in California, but the benefitsfrom receiving this income and having the opportunity to become employed oremployable will stick with the welfare recipient if they stay in California orgo back to their true domicile. Similarly, tuition subsidies are "consumed"in-state but the recipient takes the benefits of a college education with himwherever he goes. A welfare subsidy is thus as much an investment in humancapital as is a tuition subsidy, and their attendant benefits are just as"portable."3 More importantly, this foray into social economics demonstratesthat the line drawn by the Court borders on the metaphysical, and requireslower courts to plumb the policies animating certain benefits like welfare todefine their "essence" and hence their "portability." As this Court wiselyrecognized almost 30 years ago, "the intractable economic, social, and evenphilosophical problems presented by public welfare assistance programs are notthe business of this Court." Dandridge, supra, at 487.

I therefore believe that the durational residence requirement challenged hereis a permissible exercise of the State's power to "assur[e] that servicesprovided for its residents are enjoyed only by residents." Martinez, 461 U.S.,at 328. The 1-year period established in §11450.03 is the same period thisCourt approved in Starns and Sosa. The requirement does not deprive welfarerecipients of all benefits; indeed, the limitation has no effect whatsoever ona recipient's ability to enjoy the full 5-year period of welfare eligibility;to enjoy the full range of employment, training, and accompanying supportiveservices; or to take full advantage of health care benefits under Medicaid.See Brief for Petitioners 7 8, 27. This waiting period does not preclude newresidents from all cash payments, but merely limits them to what they receivedin their prior State of residence. Moreover, as the Court recognizes, seeante, at 6, any pinch resulting from this limitation during the 1-year periodis mitigated by other programs such as homeless assistance and an increase infood stamp allowance. The 1-year period thus permissibly balances the newresident's needs for subsistence with the State's need to ensure the bonafides of their claim to residence.

Finally, Congress' express approval in 42 U.S.C. § 604(c) of durationalresidence requirements for welfare recipients like the one established byCalifornia only goes to show the reasonableness of a law like §11450.03. TheNational Legislature, where people from Mississippi as well as California arerepresented, has recognized the need to protect state resources in a time ofexperimentation and welfare reform. As States like California revamp theirtotal welfare packages, see Brief for Petitioners 5 6, they should have theauthority and flexibility to ensure that their new programs are not exploited.Congress has decided that it makes good welfare policy to give the States thispower. California has reasonably exercised it through an objective, narrowlytailored residence requirement. I see nothing in the Constitution that shouldprevent the enforcement of that requirement.*From the footnotes to Chief Justice Rehnquist's dissent:*

1\. The Court's decision in the Slaughter-House Cases only confirms my viewthat state infringement on the right to travel is limited to the kind ofbarrier established in Edwards v. California, 314 U.S. 160 (1941), and itsdiscussion is worth quoting in full: "But lest it should be said that no suchprivileges and immunities are to be found if those we have been consideringare excluded, we venture to suggest some which own their existence to theFederal government, its National character, its Constitution, or its laws."One of these is well described in the case of Crandall v. Nevada[, 6 Wall. 35(1868)]. It is said to be the right of the citizen of this great country,protected by implied guarantees of its Constitution, 'to come to the seat ofgovernment to assert any claim he may have upon that government, to transactany business he may have with it, to seek its protection, to share itsoffices, to engage in administering its functions. He has the right of freeaccess to its seaports, through which all operations of foreign commerce areconducted, to the subtreasuries, land offices, and courts of justice in theseveral States.' And quoting from the language of Chief Justice Taney inanother case, it is said 'that for all the great purposes for which theFederal government was established, we are one people, with one commoncountry, we are all citizens of the United States;' and it is, as suchcitizens, that their rights are supported in this court in Crandall v.Nevada." 16 Wall., at 79 (footnote omitted).Thomas, J., dissenting

Justice Thomas, with whom the Chief Justice joins, dissenting.

I join The Chief Justice's dissent. I write separately to address themajority's conclusion that California has violated "the right of the newlyarrived citizen to the same privileges and immunities enjoyed by othercitizens of the same State." Ante, at 12. In my view, the majority attributesa meaning to the Privileges or Immunities Clause that likely was unintendedwhen the Fourteenth Amendment was enacted and ratified.

The Privileges or Immunities Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment provides that"[n]o State shall make or enforce any law which shall abridge the privilegesor immunities of citizens of the United States." U.S. Const., Amdt. 14, §1\.Unlike the Equal Protection and Due Process Clauses, which have assumed near-talismanic status in modern constitutional law, the Court all but read thePrivileges or Immunities Clause out of the Constitution in the Slaughter-HouseCases, 16 Wall. 36 (1873). There, the Court held that the State of Louisianahad not abridged the Privileges or Immunities Clause by granting a partialmonopoly of the slaughtering business to one company. Id., at 59 63, 66. TheCourt reasoned that the Privileges or Immunities Clause was not intended "as aprotection to the citizen of a State against the legislative power of his ownState." Id., at 74. Rather the "privileges or immunities of citizens"guaranteed by the Fourteenth Amendment were limited to those "belonging to acitizen of the United States as such." Id., at 75. The Court declined tospecify the privileges or immunities that fell into this latter category, butit made clear that few did. See id., at 76 (stating that "nearly every civilright for the establishment and protection of which organized government isinstituted," including "those rights which are fundamental," are not protectedby the Clause).

Unlike the majority, I would look to history to ascertain the original meaningof the Clause.1 At least in American law, the phrase (or its closeapproximation) appears to stem from the 1606 Charter of Virginia, whichprovided that "all and every the Persons being our Subjects, which shall dwelland inhabit within every or any of the said several Colonies shall HAVE andenjoy all Liberties, Franchises, and Immunities as if they had been abidingand born, within this our Realme of England." 7 Federal and StateConstitutions, Colonial Charters and Other Organic Laws 3788 (F. Thorpe ed.1909). Other colonial charters contained similar guarantees.2 Years later, astensions between England and the American Colonies increased, the colonistsadopted resolutions reasserting their entitlement to the privileges orimmunities of English citizenship.3

The colonists' repeated assertions that they maintained the rights, privilegesand immunities of persons "born within the realm of England" and "naturalborn" persons suggests that, at the time of the founding, the terms"privileges" and "immunities" (and their counterparts) were understood torefer to those fundamental rights and liberties specifically enjoyed byEnglish citizens, and more broadly, by all persons. Presumably members of theSecond Continental Congress so understood these terms when they employed themin the Articles of Confederation, which guaranteed that "the free inhabitantsof each of these States, paupers, vagabonds and fugitives from justiceexcepted, shall be entitled to all privileges and immunities of free citizensin the several States." Art. IV. The Constitution, which superceded theArticles of Confederation, similarly guarantees that "[t]he Citizens of eachState shall be entitled to all Privileges and Immunities of Citizens in theseveral States." Art. IV, §2, cl. 1.

Justice Bushrod Washington's landmark opinion in Corfield v. Coryell, 6 Fed.Cas. 546 (No. 3, 230) (CCED Pa. 1825), reflects this historical understanding.In Corfield, a citizen of Pennsylvania challenged a New Jersey law thatprohibited any person who was not an "actual inhabitant and resident" of NewJersey from harvesting oysters from New Jersey waters. Id., at 550. JusticeWashington, sitting as Circuit Justice, rejected the argument that the NewJersey law violated Article IV's Privileges and Immunities Clause. Hereasoned, "we cannot accede to the proposition that, under this provision ofthe constitution, the citizens of the several states are permitted toparticipate in all the rights which belong exclusively to the citizens of anyother particular state, merely upon the ground that they are enjoyed by thosecitizens." Id., at 552. Instead, Washington concluded:

We feel no hesitation in confining these expressions to those privileges andimmunities which are, in their nature, fundamental; which belong, of right, tothe citizens of all free governments; and which have, at all times, beenenjoyed by the citizens of the several states which compose this Union, fromthe time of their becoming free, independent, and sovereign. What thesefundamental principles are, it would perhaps be more tedious than difficult toenumerate. They may, however, be all comprehended under the following generalheads: Protection by the government; the enjoyment of life and liberty, withthe right to acquire and possess property of every kind, and to pursue andobtain happiness and safety; subject nevertheless to such restraints as thegovernment may justly prescribe for the general good of the whole. The rightof a citizen of one state to pass through, or to reside in any other state,for purposes of trade, agriculture, professional pursuits, or otherwise; toclaim the benefit of the writ of habeas corpus; to institute and maintainactions of any kind in the courts of the state; and an exemption from highertaxes or impositions than are paid by the other citizens of the state; theelective franchise, as regulated and established by the laws or constitutionof the state in which it is to be exercised. These, and many others whichmight be mentioned, are, strictly speaking, privileges and immunities." Id. at551 552.

Washington rejected the proposition that the Privileges and Immunities Clauseguaranteed equal access to all public benefits (such as the right to harvestoysters in public waters) that a State chooses to make available. Instead, heendorsed the colonial-era conception of the terms "privileges" and"immunities," concluding that Article IV encompassed only fundamental rightsthat belong to all citizens of the United States.4 Id., at 552.

Justice Washington's opinion in Corfield indisputably influenced the Membersof Congress who enacted the Fourteenth Amendment. When Congress gathered todebate the Fourteenth Amendment, members frequently, if not as a matter ofcourse, appealed to Corfield, arguing that the Amendment was necessary toguarantee the fundamental rights that Justice Washington identified in hisopinion. See Harrison, Reconstructing the Privileges or Immunities Clause, 101Yale L. J. 1385, 1418 (1992) (referring to a Member's "obligatory quotationfrom Corfield"). For just one example, in a speech introducing the Amendmentto the Senate, Senator Howard explained the Privileges or Immunities Clause byquoting at length from Corfield.5 Cong. Globe, 39th Cong., 1st Sess., 2765(1866). Furthermore, it appears that no Member of Congress refuted the notionthat Washington's analysis in Corfield undergirded the meaning of thePrivileges or Immunities Clause.6

That Members of the 39th Congress appear to have endorsed the wisdom ofJustice Washington's opinion does not, standing alone, provide dispositiveinsight into their understanding of the Fourteenth Amendment's Privileges orImmunities Clause. Nevertheless, their repeated references to the Corfielddecision, combined with what appears to be the historical understanding of theClause's operative terms, supports the inference that, at the time theFourteenth Amendment was adopted, people understood that "privileges orimmunities of citizens" were fundamental rights, rather than every publicbenefit established by positive law. Accordingly, the majority's conclusionthat a State violates the Privileges or Immunities Clause when it"discriminates" against citizens who have been domiciled in the State for lessthan a year in the distribution of welfare benefit appears contrary to theoriginal understanding and is dubious at best.

As The Chief Justice points out, ante at 1, it comes as quite a surprise thatthe majority relies on the Privileges or Immunities Clause at all in thiscase. That is because, as I have explained supra, at 1 2, The Slaughter-HouseCases sapped the Clause of any meaning. Although the majority appears tobreathe new life into the Clause today, it fails to address its historicalunderpinnings or its place in our constitutional jurisprudence. Because Ibelieve that the demise of the Privileges or Immunities Clause has contributedin no small part to the current disarray of our Fourteenth Amendmentjurisprudence, I would be open to reevaluating its meaning in an appropriatecase. Before invoking the Clause, however, we should endeavor to understandwhat the framers of the Fourteenth Amendment thought that it meant. We shouldalso consider whether the Clause should displace, rather than augment,portions of our equal protection and substantive due process jurisprudence.The majority's failure to consider these important questions raises thespecter that the Privileges or Immunities Clause will become yet anotherconvenient tool for inventing new rights, limited solely by the "predilectionsof those who happen at the time to be Members of this Court." Moore v. EastCleveland, 431 U.S. 494, 502 (1977).

I respectfully dissent.*From the footnotes to Justice Thomas's dissent:*

1\. Legal scholars agree on little beyond the conclusion that the Clause doesnot mean what the Court said it meant in 1873. See, e.g., Harrison,Reconstructing the Privileges or Immunities Clause, 101 Yale L. J. 1385, 1418(1992) (Clause is an antidiscrimination provision); D. Currie, TheConstitution in the Supreme Court 341 351 (1985) (same); 2 W. Crosskey,Politics and the Constitution in the History of the United States 1089 1095(1953) (Clause incorporates first eight Amendments of the Bill of Rights); M.Curtis, No State Shall Abridge 100 (1986) (Clause protects the rights includedin the Bill of Rights as well as other fundamental rights); B. Siegan, SupremeCourt's Constitution 46 71 (1987) (Clause guarantees Lockean conception ofnatural rights); Ackerman, Constitutional Politics/Constitutional Law, 99 YaleL. J. 453, 521 536 (1989) (same); J. Ely, Democracy and Distrust 28 (1980)(Clause "was a delegation to future constitutional decision-makers to protectcertain rights that the document neither lists or in any specific way givesdirections for finding"); R. Berger, Government by Judiciary 30 (2d ed. 1997)(Clause forbids race discrimination with respect to rights listed in the CivilRights Act of 1866); R. Bork, The Tempting of America 166 (1990) (Clause isinscrutable and should be treated as if it had been obliterated by an inkblot).